
--- Sayfa 1 ---
AV-GS: Learning Material and Geometry Aware
Priors for Novel View Acoustic Synthesis
Swapnil Bhosale
University of Surrey, UK
Haosen Yang
University of Surrey, UK
Diptesh Kanojia
University of Surrey, UK
Jiankang Deng
Imperial College London, UK
Xiatian Zhu
University of Surrey, UK
Abstract
Novel view acoustic synthesis (NVAS) aims to render binaural audio at any target
viewpoint, given a mono audio emitted by a sound source at a 3D scene. Existing
methods have proposed NeRF-based implicit models to exploit visual cues as a
condition for synthesizing binaural audio. However, in addition to low efficiency
originating from heavy NeRF rendering, these methods all have a limited ability of
characterizing the entire scene environment such as room geometry, material prop-
erties, and the spatial relation between the listener and sound source. To address
these issues, we propose a novel Audio-Visual Gaussian Splatting (AV-GS) model.
To obtain a material-aware and geometry-aware condition for audio synthesis, we
learn an explicit point-based scene representation with an audio-guidance param-
eter on locally initialized Gaussian points, taking into account the space relation
from the listener and sound source. To make the visual scene model audio adaptive,
we propose a point densification and pruning strategy to optimally distribute the
Gaussian points, with the per-point contribution in sound propagation (e.g., more
points needed for texture-less wall surfaces as they affect sound path diversion).
Extensive experiments validate the superiority of our AV-GS over existing alterna-
tives on the real-world RWAS and simulation-based SoundSpaces datasets. Project
page: https://surrey-uplab.github.io/research/avgs/
1
Introduction
Novel view synthesis [25, 1, 14] allows to generate images for any target viewpoints, which has
been extensively studied and advanced. For real-world applications in augmented reality (AR) and
virtual reality (VR), solely visual rendering of 3D scenes without spatial audio (i.e., deaf) fails to
fully immerse users in the virtual environment. This thus inspires a recent surge of investigating
novel view acoustic synthesis (NVAS) [4, 17, 5, 32]. By synthesizing binaural audio (two channels
corresponding to the left and right ear) taking into account the factors like directionality, distance and
relative elevation, this can create a spatial audio experience akin to real-life perception [23]. However,
realistic binaural audio synthesis is challenging, since the wavelengths of sound waves are much
longer, necessitating the modeling of wave diffraction and scattering. To illustrate, while blocking
the sun with your thumb is easy, blocking thunder sounds with your thumb is difficult because sound
waves wrap around obstacles. A sound wave propagating through a 3D space undergoes various
sophisticated acoustic phenomena, like direct sound, early reflections, and late reverberations.
Aiming to render binaural audio from the mono audio for target poses, Neural Acoustic Field (NAF)
[21] learns room acoustics in a synthetic environment with a 2D grid of implicit representations as a
condition. However, deriving a 2D representation grid for real-view scenes is extremely challenging in
the presence of unconstrained objects, materials, and occlusion in 3D scenes. Alternatively, AV-NeRF
[17] leverages implicit representations of the visual cue by learning a vision NeRF model [25] that
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2406.08920v3  [cs.SD]  16 Mar 2025

--- Sayfa 2 ---
Figure 1: Sound propagation point patterns between a listener (blue sphere) and emitter (yellow
sphere) captured by our AV-GS. Notice the points outside the propagation path (points behind the
speaker, points behind rigid walls). Please note we slice the scene into half along the y-axis (omitting
the points from the ceiling) in order to facilitate better visibility.
generates the listener’s view. Nonetheless, this can only offer limited conditions, as the listener’s
view provides information from only the line-of-sight, whilst audio spreads around corners more
widely (a listener cannot see behind but can hear sources that are behind). Further, NeRF’s training
and inference efficiency is typically low [37, 14].
To overcome these limitations, in this work, we present a novel Audio-Visual Gaussian Splatting
(AV-GS) model, characterized by efficiently learning an explicit, holistic 3D scene condition with rich
material and geometry information, as well as more comprehensive contextual knowledge beyond
the listener’s field of view for enhanced synthesis conditioning. Due to the intrinsic discrepancy
between vision and audio as discussed earlier, extending existing 3D Gaussian splatting-based
(3DGS) [14] from visual scenes to 3D audio (i.e., spatial audio) is non-trivial. Optimizing towards
scene visual reconstruction, points tend to over-populate along object edges and under-populate in
texture-less regions such as walls, doors etc. But, such point distribution is rhetoric when learning
sound propagation since, major changes in sound paths (absorption and diversion) primarily happen
around those texture-less regions. The key challenge lies in jointly modeling 3D geometry and
material characteristics of the visual scene objects to instigate direction and distance awareness for
realistic binaural audios. To that end, we decouple the physical geometric prior from the 3DGS
representation to learn an acoustic field network by introducing audio-guidance parameters. These
audio-guidance parameters combined with their relative distance and direction from the listener and
sound source, are projected on-the-fly to derive holistic scene-aware and material-aware conditions
for synthesizing binaural audios (see Figure 1). We hypothesize that converging AV-GS on binaural
audio reconstruction loss, requires location and density adjustment of the Gaussian points relative to
the “audio-guidance” provided by the individual point. Towards this direction, we design a Gaussian
point densification and pruning strategy based on the individual per-point contribution in providing
this “guidance” for sound propagation, ultimately improving the overall binaural audio synthesis.
To summarize, we make the following contributions: (1) The first novel view acoustic synthesis work
with conditions on holistic scene geometry and material information; (2) A novel AV-GS model that
learns a holistic geometry-aware material-aware scene representation in a tailored 3DGS pipeline;
(3) Extensive evaluations validating the advantages of our method over prior art alternatives on both
synthetic and real-world datasets.
2
Related Work
Audio binauralization converts monaural (single-channel) audio signals into binaural (two-channel)
audio signals. It can enhance immersion by simulating sound directionality, distance, and spatial
cues. Generating realistic binaural audio from mono audio is challenging [31, 30], prompting the
exploration of various conditioning techniques in the literature.
Geometry and material conditioning Luo et al. [21] introduced Neural Acoustic Field (NAF) for
room acoustics modeling using implicit neural representations of geometric features, capturing spatial
information of speakers and receivers. Su et al. [34] also learned implicit neural representations
for audio, focusing on interactive acoustic radiance transfer, relying on scene geometry as input.
Anton and Dinesh [29] proposed a material-aware binaural sound propagation model, incorporating
material and topology data, necessitating an acoustic material database. In contrast, our approach
2

--- Sayfa 3 ---
learns explicit representation from 3D scenes and disentangles learning of physical and material
properties, eliminating reliance on scene geometry and material characteristics as inputs.
Visual cue conditioning Recent works leverage visual cues to generate spatial audio from mono audio,
capturing complementary scene characteristics [9, 38, 27, 41, 18, 44, 19, 28]. Li et al. [15] proposed
a multi-task approach optimizing binaural audio generation and flipped audio classification, sharing
visual cues from corresponding video frames. Chen et al. [4] synthesized sound by analyzing input
audio-visual cues, incorporating active speaker features, target pose, and encoded visual features in
the acoustic synthesis pipeline. Alternatively, Liang et al. [17] encoded the listener’s position and
orientation, conditioned by the listener’s view. It additionally provides local visual depth information
dependent on the listener’s position. However, focusing solely on the listener’s view overlooks the
broader 3D scene geometry’s contribution, which is crucial for sound propagation. We thus propose
to learn a holistic 3D scene representation, enhancing binauralization guidance with additional audio
parameters.
3D Scene Representation Learning Point-based rendering techniques, initiated by [10], utilize
point-based representation where each point affects a single pixel. Zwicker et al. [46] advanced this
with ellipsoid-based rendering (splatting), allowing mutual overlap to fill image holes. At the absence
of given geometry, Mildenhall et al. [25] explored neural implicit representation, NeRF, predicting
view-dependent radiance via implicit density fields. NeRF requires combining colors of densely
sampled points along the camera rays for high-quality rendering. 3D Gaussian splatting (3D-GS)
[14], a novel-view synthesis method, employs explicit point-based representation, contrasting with
NeRF’s volumetric rendering. Since its real-time high-quality rendering capabilities that 3DGS and
its variants [42] has been applied to various domains, including simultaneous localization [13, 24],
content generation [36], and 4D dynamic scenes [16, 39, 43], among others.
However, no works take the 3DGS advantages to improve the NVAS task. Hence, in this work, we
for the first time exploit the 3D-GS for NVAS, to the best of our knowledge, including capturing the
scene geometry and material-related information for audio signal processing purposes. Further, we
adapt the point management mechanism to account for the characteristics of sound propagation. In
a nutshell, our approach aims to improve binaural audio reconstruction loss in AV-GS by adjusting
Gaussian point location and density based on their contribution to sound propagation guidance.
3
Method
Problem definition Deployed at a location XS in a 3D scene, a sound source S emits a mono audio
amono. A listener entity L moves around in this 3D scene, capturing multiple observations using a
camera mounted with a binaural microphone. Each observation Op = (VC, VA), constitutes a pair of
a camera view VC and an auditory perspective VA, w.r.t a specific listener pose p = (XL, d), where
XL is the 3D position of the listener and d is the viewing direction corresponding to listener’s head. A
camera view VC defines that at the pose p, the listener would observe a RGB image, I (as their view).
Similarly, an auditory perspective VA defines that at the pose p, the listener hears a binaural audio,
abi = {al, ar} where l and r represent the left and right ear respectively. Given N observations
from the listener, O = {O1, O2, ..., ON}, the task is to predict the binaural audio abi∗for a novel
observation Op∗having an arbitrary unseen pose p∗.
3.1
Audio-Visual Gaussian Splatting (AV-GS)
Our model is comprised of a 3D Gaussian Splatting model G, an acoustic field network F, and an
audio binauralizer B. In order to model sound propagation in space and time, having a holistic scene
prior as contextual guidance is essential. Crucially, this guidance must incorporate both geometric
and material-related characteristics. For facilitating the learning of visual and auditory modalities
with inherently distinct characteristics, we decouple the physical geometry and the acoustic field by
introducing in-between an acoustic field network F that learns geometry-aware and material-aware
scene contexts. In the following, we first, provide a brief regarding learning the scene geometry.
Later, we explain how to construct an audio-focused representation Ga. We further describe the
process of decoding the parameters of Ga on the fly using view-dependent information, followed by
point densification and pruning tailored for sound propagation.
3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) [14] is a state-of-the-art novel-view synthesis method that learns an
explicit point-based representation of the 3D scene. It is utilized here to capture the scene geometry.
3

--- Sayfa 4 ---
Figure 2: Overview of our proposed AV-GS. Our model is comprised of a 3D Gaussian Splatting
model G, an acoustic field network F and an audio binauralizer B. We first train G to capture the
scene geometry information. Next, we construct an audio-focused point representation Ga, with
the location X and audio-guidance parameter α initialized by the pre-trained G. Then the acoustic
field network F is used to process the α parameters for all the Gaussian points in the vicinity of the
listener and the sound source (in the 3D space). The output from F is finally used to condition the
audio binauralizer B, which transforms the mono audio to binaural audio w.r.t the listener and sound
source location.
Specifically, each point in the explicit representation G is represented as a 3D Gaussian ellipsoid to
which physical attributes like position X, quaternion R, scale S, opacity O and Spherical Harmonic
coefficients (SH) representing view-dependent color are attached.
For an arbitrary camera view VC
∗with a pose p∗, we project/splat 3D Gaussians onto the 2D image
plane to obtain the listener’s view as an RGB image I∗. The projection of 3D Gaussian ellipsoids can
be formulated as:
Σ′ = JWΣW T JT
(1)
where Σ′ and Σ = RSST RT are the covariance matrices for 3D Gaussian ellipsoids and projected
Gaussian ellipsoids on 2D image from a viewpoint with viewing transformation matrix W. J is the
Jacobian matrix for the projective transformation. Please refer to [14] for more details on splatting.
3.1.1
Acoustic Field Network
As a part of the decoupling approach, we further introduce an audio-focused point-based representa-
tion Ga.
Concretely, every point in Ga is parameterized using the location X, alongside a learnable audio-
guidance parameter α to encapsulate material-specific characteristics of the scene. X is initialized
using the location of Gaussian points in G, in order to impose the scene geometry knowledge. To
initialize α we concatenate the view-dependent color priors from G, particularly spherical harmonics
SH and quaternion feature R. An intuition is to choose the parameters that provide information
regarding the color and density characteristics, which are often correlated with material properties [8]
(see ablation on the choice of different parameters from G for forming α in Section 4.4).
In order to drive the mono to binaural audio transformation, a pose-specific holistic scene context
has to be derived from Ga. To achieve this, we derive a position-guidance feature G w.r.t both, the
listener L and the sound source S. Position-guidance G concatenated with the audio-guidance α is
used as an input to the acoustic field network F to obtain a joint context for each point w.r.t to the
listener and the sound source separately.
C = CS ⊕CL
(2)
Ci = F(α, Gi); Gi =
X −Xi
∥X −Xi∥2
, i ∈{S, L}
(3)
4

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Concatenating (represented using ⊕) the listener-context and the speaker-context yields the overall
pose-specific holistic scene context. We obtain the condition for binauralization by averaging the
context across all points in Ga, post dropping points outside the vicinity of the listener and sound
source. The vicinity for the listener and sound source is defined by the nearest kl and ks points based
on the Euclidean distance between X and XL and that between X and XS, respectively. We provide
an ablation for selecting the size of vicinity points in Section 4.4.
3.1.2
Audio Binauralizer
An audio binauralization module B transforms the mono audio amono emergent from the sound
source S into binaural audio abi = {al, ar}, representing the left and right audio channels. The
position and orientation of the listener (relative to the sound source) along with the learned holistic
scene context C is used to condition this transformation.
abi = B(amono|C, XL)
(4)
where XL denotes the listener’s position and orientation. We adopt a similar architecture for the
binauralization as [17], wherein XL and C are fused to generate acoustics masks mm and md
representing the mixture and difference of the sound fields respectively. Specifically, an MLP
combines XL and Ga with a frequency query f ∈[0, F] to produce a feature vector which is further
projected using a linear projection to obtain a mixture mask mm for frequency f. This feature vector
is concatenated with the transformed direction θ and passed to a second MLP to generate a difference
mask md. All frequencies within [0, F] are queried to generate complete masks for both the mixture
and difference. The magnitude spectrogram smono, computed using short-time Fourier transform
(STFT) over amono, is multiplied with mm and md to obtain the mixture magnitude sm and the
difference magnitude sd, respectively. Finally, an inverse STFT is operated on sm and sd to obtain
the binaural audios for the left and right channels, al and ar. The architecture of the binauralizer is
discussed in our appendix A.2.
3.2
Model training
Due to our decoupling design, we adopt a dual-stage optimization, starting with an initial warm-
up stage that learns the physical properties of the Gaussian points using gradients obtained while
reconstructing camera views (RGB images). The objective of this initial stage is to infer an explicit
point-based representation G to capture the scene geometry. Optimization of G is adapted from the
original 3D-GS [14] using the loss function,
LG = (1 −λ)L1 + λLSSIM
(5)
In the second stage, we initialize the audio-guidance parameters of Ga using physical parameters
of the warmed-up 3D Gaussians. Subsequently, we learn the material properties for the Gaussian
points using gradients obtained in the binauralization task for every training auditory perspective.
Optimization of Ga is guided by a combination of the binaural audio reconstruction loss, Lm and a
volume regularization loss, Lv.
LGa = (1 −λa)Lm + λaLv
(6)
Lm = L2(sm) + L2(sl) + L2(sr)
(7)
where, Lm is the summation of the L2 loss calculated individually between the predicted magnitudes
for sm, sl, sr (i.e., mixture, left and right audio channel, respectively) and their respective ground-truth
magnitudes. Lv = PNa
i=1 Prod(αi), where Prod(.) is the product of the values of the audio-guidance
parameter α of each Gaussian point in the auditory perspective, encouraging the audio-guidance
parameters to be small, and non-overlapping.
The physical properties and material properties of the new Gaussians are decoded from the learned
physical parameters and audio-guidance parameters respectively, in a view-dependent manner on-the-
fly.
Audio-aware point management The location of points in Ga are initialized from G, however since
G is optimized using an image reconstruction loss, the initial placement of the points in Ga is not
necessarily contributive to an optimal audio guidance. Especially, it has been observed in recent
works that 3D-GS is inadequate in densifying texture-less and less observed areas [20, 6, 2].
5

--- Sayfa 6 ---
To address this problem, we propose an error-based point growing policy that populates new points in
Ga, wherever deemed significant. Specifically, the densification step is interleaved across multiple
binauralization forward passes. During each densification step, we compute averaged gradients
(across all steps up to the previous consecutive densification step) for each point in Ga that lies in the
vicinity, denoted as Θg. Points with Θg > τg are deemed as significant, where τg is a pre-defined
threshold. Using the original 3D position as a probability distribution function (PDF), we sample new
points. The audio-guidance parameters for these new points are obtained by random initialization.
Additionally, we regularly employ a random elimination of points to avoid rapid expansion of new
points (e.g., every 3000 iterations).
4
Experiments
4.1
Datasets
We evaluate both a real-world dataset-RWAVS and a synthetic dataset-SoundSpaces.
Real-World Audio-Visual Scene (RWAVS) [17] The RWAVS dataset offers realistic multi-modal
training samples constituting camera poses, high-quality binaural audios, and images. The dataset
consists of 11 indoor and 2 outdoor scenes. Randomly sampling the sound source and listener
positions, the authors collected data ranging from 10 to 25 minutes for every scene. For every scene,
a data sample includes a set of camera poses (sound source and listener), extracted RGB key frame,
followed by one-second binaural audio (as received at the listener position) and one-second mono
source audio (as emitted by the sound source). We follow an 80:20 train-validation split for every
scene in the dataset.
SoundSpaces synthetic dataset [3] The Soundspaces dataset consists of 6 indoor scenes with varying
degrees of complexity (2 scenes having a single room with rectangular walls; 2 scenes having a
single room with a non-rectangular walls; 2 with multi-room layout). Since the dataset includes
room impulse responses (RIR) recorded at receiver/listener positions, we replace the acoustic mask
generation block with an RIR prediction block. The listener consists of a stereo listener, with four
discrete head orientations among 0, 90, 180, and 270. We follow the same 80:20 train-validation split,
as [17] for every scene in the dataset.
4.2
Implementation Details
Our complete implementation is based in PyTorch using a single Nvidia A550 GPU. The learning
rate for all physical parameters in G is adopted from the original 3D-GS implementation [14]. For the
acoustic field network F, we use MLP network with 64 nodes. Hyper-parameters for the binauralizer
B, as well as the metrics are adopted from AV-NeRF [17]. For the audio-aware point management,
we set τg to 0.0004. Additionally, after every 3k iterations we randomly eliminate points using an
outlier removal process (from Open3D [45]) that removes points that have less than 8 neighbors in a
sphere less than radius of 0.1.
As a part of the proposed decoupling, we train the 3D-GS model G for 3k iterations, wherein each
iteration involves randomly sampling a camera view VC and optimizing the parameters for G. Post
this we initialize α with the physical parameters from G, and train for 40k iterations, wherein now
each iteration involves randomly sampling an auditory perspective VA and optimizing the parameters
for Ga and B.
4.3
Results
Binaural audio synthesis - RWAVS dataset - Table 1 In order to have a fair comparison, we
adopt the same metrics - magnitude distance [MAG] [41] (computed in time-frequency domain) and
envelope distance [ENV] [26] (computed in time domain), as [17]. Particularly, (1) Mono-Mono
duplicates the source audio to create fake binaural audio without modifications; (2) Mono-Energy
scales the input audio’s energy to match the target, generating stereo audio by duplicating the scaled
audio; (3) Stereo-Energy separately scales the input audio’s energy for each channel to match the
target, then combines them for stereo audio; In addition to the codec baselines above, we also
compare with NAF [21], INRAS [34], and AV-NeRF [17]. AV-GS significantly surpasses all prior
arts across all scenes, by a significant margin. Particularly compared against AV-NeRF, which utilizes
6

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Table 1: Comparison with state-of-the-art methods on RWAVS dataset.
Methods
Modality
Office ↓
House ↓
Apartment ↓
Outdoors ↓
Overall ↓
Audio
Visual
MAG
ENV
MAG
ENV
MAG
ENV
MAG
ENV
MAG
ENV
Mono-Mono
✓
✗
9.269
0.411
11.889
0.424
15.120
0.474
13.957
0.470
12.559
0.445
Mono-Energy
✓
✗
1.536
0.142
4.307
0.180
3.911
0.192
1.634
0.127
2.847
0.160
Stereo-Energy
✓
✗
1.511
0.139
4.301
0.180
3.895
0.191
1.612
0.124
2.830
0.159
INRAS [35]
✓
✗
1.405
0.141
3.511
0.182
3.421
0.201
1.502
0.130
2.460
0.164
NAF [22]
✓
✗
1.244
0.137
3.259
0.178
3.345
0.193
1.284
0.121
2.283
0.157
AV-NeRF [17]
✓
✓
0.930
0.129
2.009
0.155
2.230
0.184
0.845
0.111
1.504
0.145
AV-GS (ours)
✓
✓
0.861
0.124
1.970
0.152
2.031
0.177
0.791
0.107
1.417
0.140
Figure 3: In the presence of (a) complex geometry, and (b) meaningless views, AV-NeRF, when
compared to our AV-GS makes errors in binaural synthesis. For both scenarios we showcase the
corresponding listener view, used by AV-NeRF, as well as the learned holistic scene representation
that is used by AV-GS, and hence unaffected by both scenarios.
audio-visual cues, AV-GS achieves a 5.7% and 3.4% relative improvement in terms of MAG and
ENV respectively.
We highlight the qualitative improvement of AV-GS over AV-NeRF in Fig. 3 (and in Section A.1).
AV-NeRF extracts visual cues from the listener’s view using a 256x256 RGB and depth image
(rendered by a pre-trained NeRF) and processed by a frozen ResNet18 [11] model that is trained
on ImageNet [7]. When the listener’s view includes multiple objects or complex geometries (Fig.
3(a)), or meaningless information (Fig. 3(b)), it leads to sub-optimal visual cue extraction and poor
binauralization. In contrast, our AV-GS uses learned representations (combining α of points in Ga
w.r.t to the listener and speaker) to extract context at a more holistic level, remaining unaffected by
these scenarios.
RIR generation - Soundspaces dataset - Table 2(a) Following [17] and [21], we compare AV-GS
against classical high-performance audio coding methods: Advanced Audio Coding (AAC) [12] and
Xiph Opus [40], applying both linear and nearest neighbor interpolation techniques to the coded
acoustic fields. Additionally, we also compare with existing neural methods: NAF [21], INRAS [34],
and AV-NeRF [17]. It can be observed that AV-GS outperforms all the prior arts by a significant
margin.
Table 2: Comparison with the state-of-the-art and Ablation study on physical parameters.
(a) Comparison with state-of-the-art: Performance on SoundSpaces
dataset using T60, C50, and EDT metrics. Lower score indicates a
higher RIR generation quality. Opus is an open audio codec [40], and
AAC is a multi-channel audio coding standard [12].
Methods
Audio
Visual
T60 (%) ↓
C50 (dB) ↓
EDT (sec) ↓
Opus-nearest
✓
✗
10.10
3.58
0.115
Opus-linear
✓
✗
8.64
3.13
0.097
AAC-nearest
✓
✗
9.35
1.67
0.059
AAC-linear
✓
✗
7.88
1.68
0.057
INRAS [35]
✓
✗
3.14
0.60
0.019
NAF [22]
✓
✗
3.18
1.06
0.031
AV-NeRF [17]
✓
✓
2.47
0.57
0.016
AV-GS (ours)
✓
✓
2.23
0.53
0.014
(b) Ablation on the choice of physical
parameters from G, for initializing α.
Parameters
Dimension
Overall ↓
MAG
ENV
O
1
1.477
0.140
S
3
1.451
0.141
R
4
1.439
0.140
SH
48
1.435
0.140
S, O
4
1.481
0.141
SH, O
49
1.466
0.141
S, SH
51
1.549
0.143
SH, R
52
1.417
0.140
S, SH, O
52
1.500
0.141
SH, R, O
53
1.454
0.141
S, SH, R, O
56
1.496
0.141
7

--- Sayfa 8 ---
Table 3: Comparing for efficiency in terms of the inference time with the existing AV-NeRF using
multiple perspective views. Please note the inference time includes the time for rendering the view
from V-NeRF, extracting features through AV-Mapper ([17]) and then rendering the binaural audio
from A-NeRF.
Methods
Time (↓)
Overall (↓)
Inference
MAG
ENV
AV-NeRF - 1 view
1.4s
1.504
0.145
AV-NeRF - 2 views
2.9s
1.495
0.145
AV-NeRF - 4 views
7.6s
1.482
0.144
AV-GS (ours)
0.08s
1.417
0.140
Improved efficiency Decoding α on-the-fly helps AV-GS retain the efficiency advantage of having an
explicit point based representation over learning an implicit representation of the visual 3D scene. In
contrast, AV-NeRF trains an additional NeRF model, whose outputs are used to render the listener’s
view which is the condition for their binauralizer module. In Table 3, we compare the inference time
for a single scene (House scene 1) from the RWAVS dataset. Although the original implementation
of AV-NeRF proposed a single view in the direction of listener’s viewing direction (used as the
listener’s context), we modify their implementation in which the V-NeRF renders 2 and 4 perspective
views with a field of view of 90°for each receiver’s position. It can be observed, although using
the additional views, helps provide additional local context around the listener (hence improving
the binauralization performance), but only at the cost of increased inference time. AV-GS on the
other hand requires least rendering time, while providing the best binauralization performance. It is
important to note that, although we train the 3D-GS for only an initial warm-up stage of 3k iterations,
we can still jointly train both G and Ga on the corresponding camera view VC and the auditory
perspective VA respectively. By doing so, AV-GS would be able to synthesize both binaural audio as
well the visual view at the unseen target (novel) viewpoint, without any increase in the training time
than that of as shown in Table 3 (last row). In this work, we instead focus on only the binaural audio
synthesis and hence train only Ga in the second stage.
Although we train the 3D-GS for just an initial 3k iterations, we can still train both G and Ga together
for the corresponding camera view VC and auditory perspective VA, such that the trained AV-GS
is able to synthesize both the binaural audio and the visual view from a novel viewpoint , thereby
making it a fair comparison with AV-NeRF [17]. However, in this work, we focus solely on binaural
audio synthesis and only train Ga in the second stage.
4.4
Ablation study
We use the binaural audio synthesis task for performing our ablation study and report average
performance across all scenes in the RWAVS dataset.
Initialization of α. 3D-GS learns a point-based representation (G) of the 3D scene such that each
point in the explicit representation is represented as a 3D Gaussian ellipsoid to which physical
attributes like position X, quaternion R, scale S, opacity O and Spherical Harmonic coefficients
(SH) representing view-dependent color are attached. As discussed above, we initialize the audio-
guidance parameter α using the learned physical parameters from G. Table 2(b) shows an in-depth
study of the effect on the binauralization performance when choosing different parameters from G
for the initialization. It is evident that SH and R, when considered individually as well as when
combined, are crucial parameters that help provide an overall better binauralization performance.
Size of the vicinity The learned Gaussian points G representation normally consists of millions of
points, and using all the points for computing the condition for the binauralization task will result in
a huge computational overload. Moreover, intuitionally, points near the listener and speaker location
in the 3D space (i.e.vicinity) are more contributive to determining the local geometry and material
characteristics, and greatly influence the sound field. Empirically in Table 4a, we find that using
15 percentile of the points in the vicinity (listener and speaker considered separately) yields the
best performance. Using an extremely high percentile for capturing the vicinity generally helps, but
only to a certain extent, since it increases the risk of adding unnecessary information. Moreover,
it is important to note that in scenes with smaller room sizes or when the listener and speaker are
8

--- Sayfa 9 ---
Table 4: (a)Ablation on the size of vicinity w.r.t the listener and sound source position. (b) Effect of
audio-aware point management.
(a) Percentile-k denotes the top k % points
nearest to the listener and sound source.
Percentile
Overall ↓
MAG
ENV
5
1.482
0.143
10
1.454
0.141
15
1.417
0.140
20
1.424
0.141
25
1.428
0.141
(b) SfM: Structure-from-motion [33] (i.e.camera calibration),
G: warmup using 3D-GS [14]
.
Initialization
Point
Overall ↓
management
MAG
ENV
SfM
✗
1.668
0.147
✓
1.552
0.143
G (3D-GS)
✗
1.481
0.141
✓
1.417
0.140
Figure 4: Ablation on the size of vicinity w.r.t the listener and sound source position. Percentile-k
denotes the top k % points nearest to the listener and sound source are considered in computing the
scene context. (a) RGB color (from G), (b) learned α (from Ga), (c) 5% percentile vicinity, (d) 25%
percentile vicinity.
placed nearby, a larger vicinity capture might lead to overlapping points thus adding to redundant
information (see Fig. 4 (d)).
Effect of audio-aware point management. AV-GS infers local geometry from an explicit point-
based prior and learns additional audio-specific parameters for every point. The local geometry
can be inferred either directly from the sparse points produced during camera calibration using
Structure-from-motion (SfM) [33] or warming up a 3D-GS model on the SfM points. From Table
4b it is evident that audio-aware point management helps improve the binauralization performance
irrespective of the adopted point initialization approach.
Texture-less regions such as walls, doors, etc are the regions with maximum sound absorption and
diversion and hence having optimal point density promotes better modeling of sound propagation.
5
Conclusion
In this work, we present AV-GS, a holistic scene representation learning approach for conditioning
novel view acoustic synthesis. The core of AV-GS lies in the proposed decoupled modeling of
3D scene geometry and material characteristics of scene objects for sound propagation, enabled
by the introduction of additional audio-guidance parameters per point within an acoustic field
network. We show that our approach leverages audio-aware Gaussian point positioning to improve
the binauralization performance, on real world as well as synthetic 3D scenes, significantly in
comparison to prior art alternatives.
Limitations Although AV-GS achieves a new state-of-the-art on the NVAS task by learning a
holistic scene representation with geometry-aware and material-aware characteristics, it faces some
challenges. Like AV-Nerf, AV-GS currently learns a separate representation for each scene, posing a
significant challenge for generalizability and transferability across multiple scenes, which is crucial
for improving efficiency and reducing computational demands. Also, as observed in Table 1, the
performance drops when the scene size increases (e.g., from Office to House), due to the difficulty in
learning representations for larger, complex geometries with multiple rooms. An interesting research
direction would be to model individual rooms using separate 3D-GS representations and then learn a
transfer function across rooms.
9

--- Sayfa 10 ---
References
[1] J. T. Barron, B. Mildenhall, D. Verbin, P. P. Srinivasan, and P. Hedman. Mip-nerf 360: Un-
bounded anti-aliased neural radiance fields. In CVPR, 2022.
[2] S. R. Bulò, L. Porzi, and P. Kontschieder. Revising densification in gaussian splatting. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2404.06109, 2024.
[3] C. Chen, U. Jain, C. Schissler, S. V. A. Gari, Z. Al-Halah, V. K. Ithapu, P. Robinson, and
K. Grauman. Soundspaces: Audio-visual navigation in 3d environments. In ECCV. Springer,
2020.
[4] C. Chen, A. Richard, R. Shapovalov, V. K. Ithapu, N. Neverova, K. Grauman, and A. Vedaldi.
Novel-view acoustic synthesis. In CVPR, 2023.
[5] Z. Chen, I. D. Gebru, C. Richardt, A. Kumar, W. Laney, A. Owens, and A. Richard. Real acoustic
fields: An audio-visual room acoustics dataset and benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.18821,
2024.
[6] K. Cheng, X. Long, K. Yang, Y. Yao, W. Yin, Y. Ma, W. Wang, and X. Chen. Gaussianpro: 3d
gaussian splatting with progressive propagation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14650, 2024.
[7] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical
image database. In CVPR, 2009.
[8] S. Fridovich-Keil, A. Yu, M. Tancik, Q. Chen, B. Recht, and A. Kanazawa. Plenoxels: Radiance
fields without neural networks. In CVPR, 2022.
[9] R. Gao and K. Grauman. 2.5 d visual sound. In CVPR, 2019.
[10] J. P. Grossman and W. J. Dally.
Point sample rendering.
In Rendering Techniques’ 98:
Proceedings of the Eurographics Workshop. Springer, 1998.
[11] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In CVPR,
2016.
[12] International Organization for Standardization. Advanced audio coding (aac). ISO/IEC 13818-
7:2006, 2006.
[13] N. Keetha, J. Karhade, K. M. Jatavallabhula, G. Yang, S. Scherer, D. Ramanan, and
J. Luiten. Splatam: Splat, track & map 3d gaussians for dense rgb-d slam. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.02126, 2023.
[14] B. Kerbl, G. Kopanas, T. Leimkühler, and G. Drettakis. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time
radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 2023.
[15] S. Li, S. Liu, and D. Manocha. Binaural audio generation via multi-task learning. ACM
Transactions on Graphics, 2021.
[16] Z. Li, Z. Chen, Z. Li, and Y. Xu. Spacetime gaussian feature splatting for real-time dynamic
view synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.16812, 2023.
[17] S. Liang, C. Huang, Y. Tian, A. Kumar, and C. Xu. Av-nerf: Learning neural fields for real-world
audio-visual scene synthesis. NeurIPS, 2023.
[18] Y.-B. Lin and Y.-C. F. Wang. Exploiting audio-visual consistency with partial supervision for
spatial audio generation. In AAAI, 2021.
[19] F. Lluís, V. Chatziioannou, and A. Hofmann. Points2sound: from mono to binaural audio using
3d point cloud scenes. EURASIP Journal on Audio, Speech, and Music Processing, 2022(1):33,
2022.
[20] T. Lu, M. Yu, L. Xu, Y. Xiangli, L. Wang, D. Lin, and B. Dai. Scaffold-gs: Structured 3d
gaussians for view-adaptive rendering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00109, 2023.
[21] A. Luo, Y. Du, M. Tarr, J. Tenenbaum, A. Torralba, and C. Gan. Learning neural acoustic fields.
NeurIPS, 2022.
[22] A. Luo, Y. Du, M. J. Tarr, J. B. Tenenbaum, A. Torralba, and C. Gan. Learning neural acoustic
fields. NeurIPS, 2022.
[23] S. Majumder, C. Chen, Z. Al-Halah, and K. Grauman. Few-shot audio-visual learning of
environment acoustics. In NeurIPS, 2022.
[24] H. Matsuki, R. Murai, P. H. Kelly, and A. J. Davison. Gaussian splatting slam. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.06741, 2023.
[25] B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, M. Tancik, J. T. Barron, R. Ramamoorthi, and R. Ng. Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In ECCV, 2020.
[26] P. Morgado, N. Nvasconcelos, T. Langlois, and O. Wang. Self-supervised generation of spatial
audio for 360 video. NeurIPS, 2018.
10

--- Sayfa 11 ---
[27] K. K. Rachavarapu, V. Sundaresha, A. Rajagopalan, et al. Localize to binauralize: Audio
spatialization from visual sound source localization. In CVPR, 2021.
[28] A. Ratnarajah, S. Ghosh, S. Kumar, P. Chiniya, and D. Manocha. Av-rir: Audio-visual room
impulse response estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00834, 2023.
[29] A. Ratnarajah and D. Manocha. Listen2scene: Interactive material-aware binaural sound
propagation for reconstructed 3d scenes. In IEEE VR, 2024.
[30] A. Ratnarajah, Z. Tang, and D. Manocha. Ir-gan: Room impulse response generator for far-field
speech recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.13219, 2020.
[31] A. Ratnarajah, S.-X. Zhang, M. Yu, Z. Tang, D. Manocha, and D. Yu. Fast-rir: Fast neural
diffuse room impulse response generator. In ICASSP, 2022.
[32] K. Shimada, A. Politis, P. Sudarsanam, D. A. Krause, K. Uchida, S. Adavanne, A. Hakala,
Y. Koyama, N. Takahashi, S. Takahashi, et al. Starss23: An audio-visual dataset of spatial
recordings of real scenes with spatiotemporal annotations of sound events. NeurIPS, 2023.
[33] N. Snavely, S. M. Seitz, and R. Szeliski. Photo tourism: exploring photo collections in 3d. ACM
siggraph 2006 papers, 2006.
[34] K. Su, M. Chen, and E. Shlizerman. Inras: Implicit neural representation for audio scenes.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:8144–8158, 2022.
[35] K. Su, M. Chen, and E. Shlizerman. Inras: Implicit neural representation for audio scenes. In
NeurIPS, 2022.
[36] J. Tang, J. Ren, H. Zhou, Z. Liu, and G. Zeng. Dreamgaussian: Generative gaussian splatting
for efficient 3d content creation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16653, 2023.
[37] A. Tewari, J. Thies, B. Mildenhall, P. Srinivasan, E. Tretschk, W. Yifan, C. Lassner, V. Sitzmann,
R. Martin-Brualla, S. Lombardi, et al. Advances in neural rendering. In Computer Graphics
Forum, pages 703–735. Wiley Online Library, 2022.
[38] R. Wang, H. Cheng, L. Ye, and Q. Zhang. Visual-guided scene-aware audio generation method
based on hierarchical feature codec and rendering decision. Displays, 83:102708, 2024.
[39] G. Wu, T. Yi, J. Fang, L. Xie, X. Zhang, W. Wei, W. Liu, Q. Tian, and X. Wang. 4d gaussian
splatting for real-time dynamic scene rendering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08528, 2023.
[40] Xiph.Org Foundation. Xiph opus. https://opus-codec.org/, 2012.
[41] X. Xu, H. Zhou, Z. Liu, B. Dai, X. Wang, and D. Lin. Visually informed binaural audio
generation without binaural audios. In CVPR, 2021.
[42] H. Yang, C. Zhang, W. Wang, M. Volino, A. Hilton, L. Zhang, and X. Zhu. Localized gaussian
point management. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04251, 2024.
[43] Z. Yang, H. Yang, Z. Pan, X. Zhu, and L. Zhang. Real-time photorealistic dynamic scene
representation and rendering with 4d gaussian splatting. In ICLR, 2024.
[44] H. Zhou, X. Xu, D. Lin, X. Wang, and Z. Liu. Sep-stereo: Visually guided stereophonic audio
generation by associating source separation. In ECCV, 2020.
[45] Q.-Y. Zhou, J. Park, and V. Koltun. Open3d: A modern library for 3d data processing. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1801.09847, 2018.
[46] M. Zwicker, H. Pfister, J. Van Baar, and M. Gross. Surface splatting. In Annual conference on
Computer graphics and interactive techniques, 2001.
A
Appendix / supplemental material
Broader impact Potential applications of AV-GS lie in virtual reality, augmented reality, and im-
mersive audio experiences, where accurate and efficient binaural audio rendering can significantly
enhance user experience. However, enhanced acoustic synthesis technology could be used unethi-
cally in surveillance or privacy-invasive applications, where binaural audio could be synthesized to
eavesdrop on conversations or create misleading audio experiences.
A.1
Direction and distance awareness showcased by AV-GS
Fig. 5 highlights the distance-awareness exhibited in the binaural audios synthesized by AV-GS. The
top row shows the corresponding RGB frame or the listener’s view, followed by AV-GS’s learned
holistic scene representation in the next row. The two rows show a plot of the rendered binaural audios
(left and right respectively) with time along the x-axis and amplitude of the audio along the y-axis.
(Please note that in the second row we slice the points in Ga for along the vertical axis, essentially
11

--- Sayfa 12 ---
removing the points from the ceiling, in order to provide better visibility.) With the increase in
the distance of the listener (blue sphere) from the sound source (yellow sphere), AV-GS is able to
synthesize binaural audios with decreasing amplitude across both the left and right audio channels.
Figure 5: Distance aware audio rendering. As the distance from the sound source increases the
amplitude of the synthesized binaural audio decreases. Yellow sphere - location of the sound source,
blue sphere - location of the listener.
Fig. 6 shows the direction-awareness showcased by AV-GS. In (a) the synthesized left channel has a
higher magnitude compared to the right channel, owing to the proximity of the listener’s left ear to
the sound source. Vice-versa, in (b) the right channel has a higher amplitude compared to the right
channel owing to the proximity of the listener’s right ear to the sound source.
A.2
Binauralizer
We adopt the architecture of binauralizer from [17] with some modifications to input the learned
scene context from our acoustic field network F (see Fig. 7).
Embedding blocks take the normalized location position XL (only 2D x and y coordinates).
The main components include two Multilayer Perceptrons (MLPs), each comprising four linear layers
with an additional residual connection. The width of each linear layer, is set to 128 for the RWAVS
dataset and 256 for the SoundSpaces dataset. All linear layers are followed by ReLU activation layers,
except for the last layer, where the ReLU activation is replaced with the Sigmoid function. The first
MLP takes the listener’s position (x, y) and the frequency f ∈[0, F] as input, where F represents the
number of frequency bins. It predicts a mixture mask mm for the given frequency f and generates a
feature vector with c channels. Prior to feeding them into the MLP, we apply positional encoding to
12

--- Sayfa 13 ---
Figure 6: Direction aware audio rendering. Relative to the viewing direction of the listener w.r.t to
the sound source AV-GS synthesizes binaural audios with varying amplitude levels in the left and
right audio channel. The arrow on the listener (blue sphere) represents the viewing direction, and the
yellow sphere depicts the sound source.
Figure 7: Overview of the binauralizer module, B (with modifications from [17]).
13

--- Sayfa 14 ---
the listener’s position (x, y) and the frequency f. We set the maximum frequency used for positional
encoding as 10. A coordinate transformation [17] to project the listener’s direction θ into a high
frequency space. We concatenate the transformed listener’s direction and the feature vector, and
feed it into the second MLP. The second MLP is appended with a Sigmoid layer and a scaling layer,
ensuring that the difference mask md estimated by the second MLP falls within the range of −1, 1.
For each frequency query f, estimates two masks: mm and md, both of which are scalars. We iterate
over all frequencies f ∈[0, F] to obtain the complete masks mm and md.
For validating AV-GS on the room impulse response generation task using the Soundspaces dataset,
following [17], we drop the mixture mask, and predict the impulse response directly for a correspond-
ing time input, using the second MLP. We show these modifications in Fig. 8.
Figure 8: Changes to B for the RIR generation - Soundspaces dataset (scores reported in Table 2(a)).
14
