
--- Sayfa 1 ---
 
1 
 
 REVIEW                                                      
 
PRECURSOR THAT PREDICTS THE EARTHQUAKES, TRIGGERS, AND 
INDICATORS 
 
Manana Kachakhidze1,4, Nino Kachakhidze-Murphy1,4, Vaso Kukhianidze2  
Giorgi Ramishvili2, Badri Khvitia3 
 
1Natural Hazard Scientific‐Research Center,Georgian Technical University, Tbilisi, 0175, 
Georgia. 
2Ilia State University, Tbilisi, 0162, Georgia, 
3Sokhumi Institute of Physics and Technology, Tbilisi, 0186, Georgia  
4These authors contributed equally to this work 
 
Correspondence:  Manana Kachakhidze kachakhidzem@gmail.com  
 
Abstract 
The consolidated paper presents work carried out in the sphere of earthquake problems. On the 
base of theoretical and experimental studies, it is shown earthquake prediction possibility. There 
are discussed earthquake indicators and triggering exogenous factors for the Caucasus region. 
Besides, because the earthquake preparation process causes anomalous changes with complex 
characteristics in various geophysical fields, it is given scientifically proven suggestions for the 
classification of earthquake precursor, indicator and triggering factors. It is offered short-term plan 
for future work in the earthquake prediction direction.  
 
Introduction 
Modern ground-based and satellite methods of observation, in the seismogenic area, during the 
earthquake preparation period, reveal the anomalous changes in various geophysical fields, which 
may accompany the earthquake preparation process, and expose themselves several months, 
weeks, or days prior to earthquakes. Very interesting studies have been accumulated [2,8,13,16,27] 
which prove the certain kind of connections between anomalous changes in these fields and 
earthquakes, but it turned out that in order to guide further studies in the right direction, it is 
necessary to classify these fields into triggers, indicators, and precursors. This classification will 
simplify the vague picture created by the set of anomalous geophysical fields existent during the 
periods of earthquake preparation, and makes it difficult to detect the true precursor necessary for 
high-precision earthquake prediction. 
 
Discussion 
I. Earthquake  precursor  
         
     The detection of Electromagnetic radiation in the range of MHz, kHz, and ULF, existing 
during the formation of strong earthquakes, at the moment of an earthquake’s occurrence and 
often after that, turned out to be so important and noteworthy that radio networks were created 
in Japan (Japan-Pacific Network VLF / LF) and Europe (INFREP,European Network of 
Electromagnetic Radiation)[2,3,14, 15, 16,17,26, 86, 93]. 

--- Sayfa 2 ---
 
2 
 
     The regularity revealed by world-famous scientists on the basis of the research results is very 
significant. Namely: 
1) EM emissions appear approximately several weeks before the earthquake.  2) The spectrum of 
electromagnetic radiation is characterized by the following sequence: MHz, kHz. 3) These 
emissions are accompanied by ULF radiation. 4)  Before the earthquake VLF/LF electromagnetic 
emissions become very weak or completely disappear (so-called "silence” appears). 5) The 
"silence" of VLF/LF EM radiation is followed by an earthquake[13]. 
     We raised the question as follows: if there is radiation,  then there must be a radiating body, 
and if there is some regularity in the radiation spectrum, it must reflect the specific processes 
taking place in the radiating body. 
     In order to check this view, we have created the model of the generation of EM emissions 
detected prior to the earthquake[38], considering classical electrodynamics and the processes 
taking place in the earthquake focus. 
     The model allowed us to derive the formula where  the frequency of electromagnetic 
radiation during the earthquake preparation period is analytically connected with the fault 
length originating in the incoming earthquake focus (1): 
𝜔=
1
√𝜀µ ×
𝑐
𝑙= 𝑘
𝑐
𝑙 (1) 
where ω is the frequency of existent electromagnetic emissions, c is the light speed, and  𝑘 is the 
characteristic coefficient  of geological medium  (it approximately equals to 1). It is possible to 
determine the magnitude of the expected earthquake (the first parameter necessary for earthquake 
prediction) by EM emissions frequency records [78]: 
                                                       lg l=0.6Ms−2.5 (2)      
     This means that a change of the geophysical field characteristic parameter (VLF/LF EM 
emissions frequency) is inevitably related to changes in the fault length in the focus, which allows 
us not only qualitatively but also quantitatively to evaluate the complete picture of an earthquake 
preparation from the appearance of microcracks in the focal area, up to the formation of the main 
fault and to a final equilibrium state. 
     It is logical to assume that if  VLF / LF electromagnetic radiation can “work” as the precursor, 
it must be an exact manifestation of the mechanical stages of the avalanche-unstable geological 
model.         
     The avalanche-like unstable model of fault formation is divided into four main stages: In the 
first stage, when the chaotic formation without any orientation of micro-cracks takes place, can 
last for several months throughout the whole seismogenic area[52]. This is a reversible process 
since at this stage not only can form microcracks but also can appear as so-called “locked cracks”. 
Cracks created at this stage are small. This stage, according to our model (formula 1) in the 
electromagnetic emissions frequency range, should be expressed by the discontinuous spectrum of 
electromagnetic radiation in MHz diapason [38], which is proved by the latest special scientific 
works [13,16,19,61]. 
     The second stage of the avalanche-like unstable model of fault formation is an irreversible 
avalanche process of already somewhat oriented microstructures, which is accompanied by the 
inclusion of the earlier “locked” sections. 
     Since the crack lengths begin to increase due to the aggregation of primary small cracks, the 
electromagnetic radiation frequencies gradually decrease, and a continuous spectrum in MHz 
appears in the frequency spectrum of EM radiation[38]. 

--- Sayfa 3 ---
 
3 
 
     The transition of the MHz emissions in kHz in the frequency spectrum of electromagnetic 
radiation, according to formula (1), corresponds to the very stage when the crack length already 
reaches about a kilometer[16,38,40,61,65].    
     At the third stage of the avalanche-like unstable model of fault formation, relatively large cracks 
combine into one main fault. This process should correspond to a gradual decrease in frequencies in 
kHz, which, according to formula (1), means an increase in the length of the fault in the focal area. By 
(2) formula, also refers to the increase in magnitudes of the expected earthquake[78].  
     The combination of cracks into one fault, which proceeds intensively at the final stage of 
earthquake preparation, will use a certain part of the energy accumulated in the focal area and, 
therefore, will lead to its decrease [34]. 
     In such a situation, a period settles before an earthquake (which can last from several hours to 
even some days), when a fault is already formed, while an earthquake has not occurred yet, since 
accumulated tectonic stress is not sufficient to overcome the limitation of the solidity of the 
geological environment. 
     The system, awaiting a further “portion” of tectonic stresses, is in the so-called state of “stupor-
waiting”; in principle, the process of forming main faults no longer occurs in it and, accordingly, 
electromagnetic emissions do not occur, which has been proven by experiments[18,19,61]. 
     This process is expressed correspondingly in the electromagnetic emissions spectrum: some 
hours before the earthquake (up to 2 days) in the spectrum the emissions interruption or 
“electromagnetic emissions silence” is observed [61]. Of course, we should expect the renewal of 
electromagnetic emissions exactly before the earthquake (the fourth stage of the fault formation 
process). 
     At the final stage of earthquake preparation, a very short time is required to replenish the critical 
reserve of tectonic stresses and the origination of the main fault, which means that when 
monitoring electromagnetic radiation, for determining the time of occurrence of an incoming 
earthquake (the second characteristic parameter for prediction) the moment of interruption of the 
EM radiation spectrum is important. 
     Thus, good conformity and synthesis of our model and avalanche-like unstable model of fault 
formation are evident.  
     In addition, for determining the epicenter (the third characteristic prediction parameter) VLF/LF 
EM radiation is useful. Namely, from the points selected around the receiver, where VLF/LF EM 
emissions are fixed, by the Direction-finding method, to define the incoming earthquake epicenter 
is possible. 
     Thus, it can be emphasized that VLF/LF EM emissions turned out to be a unique precursor 
since they make it possible to simultaneously determine the magnitude of an earthquake, the 
epicenter, and the time of occurrence of inland moderate and strong incoming earthquakes. This is 
the first and only precursor that describes the process of formation of faults in the focus of an 
incoming earthquake and numerically calculates the length (magnitude) of the fault at any moment 
of monitoring. 
     It is worth underlying that no reliable criterion in seismology yet, can distinguish the strong 
foreshocks from the mainshock. This issue can be solved with rather a high accuracy on the basis 
of a theoretical model[38]: if after any shock electromagnetic emissions still continue to exist and 
the frequency data still tend to decrease, it means that the process of fault formation is not 
completed yet and we have to wait for the mainshock. It is on the contrary in the case of 
aftershocks.  

--- Sayfa 4 ---
 
4 
 
     In the next step, our interest was to check our theoretical study with the retrospective continuous 
data and to "predict" an already occurred earthquake. 
     We worked out 73 days of continuous INFREP  data for the Crete earthquake with M= 5.6 
(25/05 / 2016, 08:36:13 UTC)[39]. 
     INFREP network fixes every minute amplitudes of 10 different baseline frequencies of VLF/LF 
electromagnetic radiation in diapason 20 270 Hz - 270 000 Hz.  
     Based on our studies, if any frequency channel actually reflects the earthquake preparation, the 
avalanche-like unstable geological process should be reflected in the frequency data of this 
channel. We calculated in every minute the corresponding lengths of cracks in relation to the base 
lengths of all corresponding frequency channels (as a percentage). 
     It was found out two active channels (37 500 Hz) and (45 900 Hz) as the average daily value 
of the crack lengths was the maximum for them. This means that from the discussed 10 channels, 
the earthquake preparation process only in two of the above-mentioned frequencies had been 
described. In this case, according to the above-given formula (2), the magnitude of the incoming 
earthquake should been between 5.5 and 5.7 (Crete earthquake magnitude is really estimated as 
M= 5.6). 
     In addition, we found that the diurnal periodic variations of electromagnetic radiation, with the 
exception of the channel (37500 Hz), are clearly expressed in all channels. Such variations in the 
(37 500 Hz) channel are recorded too, but till some period, namely up to 02.05.2016, after which 
the anomalous process starts, indicating that the avalanche–unstable process of fault formation has 
already begun (Fig. 1).  
 
Fig. 1. 
Figure 1. The initial moment of the avalanche-like unstable process of fault formation is 
noted by the arrow.  
     Since only the (37 500 Hz) frequency channel meets both conditions: the average daily value 
of the crack’s lengths is maximal for this channel and an avalanche process appears only on it. 
Therefore, to predict the earthquake, we must rely only on the data of this channel. 
     During the analyses, it was found that 19 days before the earthquake, an avalanche process of 
fault formation occurred in the frequency channel (37 500 Hz). 
     In order to analyze the earthquake preparation whole process, we elaborated the daily averaged 
frequencies by using the average square deviation method and calculated   


x
 values (Fig.2).   

--- Sayfa 5 ---
 
5 
 
 
Fig. 2. 
Figure 2. The avalanche process of fault formation and EM emissions “silence” period before the 
earthquake (the arrow noted the Earthquake occurring moment). 
     Such elaboration of the data manifests the EM emission’s “silence” starting moment prior to an 
earthquake. It was equal to about two days. 
     The fact that retrospective analysis of data from real earthquakes makes it possible to fix the 
exact moments of the starting of the avalanche process of fault formation and of the “silence” of 
EM radiation means that in the case of monitoring EM emissions, it is possible to observe the 
entire process of preparing earthquakes and predict earthquakes. 
     It is clear that when the tectonic stress increases in any region's certain zone different physical-
chemical fields will change in this area and most of them will be observed as anomalies. The 
features of these fields in connection with earthquakes are revealed in the fact that they usually, 
only qualitatively express the processes in the focal area. Based on them it is not a possible 
simultaneous determination of all three parameters necessary for incoming earthquake prediction 
(magnitude, epicenter, and time of occurring). It means, that these fields really have only indicative 
features in the earthquake preparation process. 
     It is obvious also, that the process of fault formation without fail must be reflected in the 
abnormal changes in the certain geophysical field and this phenomenon should be recorded prior 
to the earthquake. The prediction of the incoming earthquake will be possible only by analyzing 
an anomalous change in such a field and as it is mentioned above, this field must be referred to as 
an earthquake true precursor (or simply a “precursor”). 
     In case of weak earthquakes, we have to wait for the electromagnetic emissions in high 
frequency diapason but these waves attenuate rapidly, and observing them on the earth’s surface 
is difficult. 
     Our research allows us to think about the possibility of artificial removal of tectonic stresses 
with using seismic and electrical influences, about which relevant articles by Russian scientists 
were published at the end of the last century[57,59,74]. Based on their own theoretical and 
experimental research they wrote: “today, at the modern stage of scientific development, the task 
of gradually easing the energy accumulated in the focus of a large earthquake for the reduction of 
tectonic stress is completely real. To achieve this goal, it was necessary to find a place where 
nature already has prepared for a catastrophic earthquake. In other words, it is necessary to solve 
the problem of forecasting an earthquake” [57,59,74]. 
     Today, because the precursor has already been discovered, a VLF/LF EM emissions mobile 
receiver has been created, and in the case of creating a VLF/LF EM emissions mobile network, in 
any s/a country, it is possible to make the short-term (operational) prediction of strong earthquakes, 

--- Sayfa 6 ---
 
6 
 
it appeared opportunity to carry out a controlled discharge of tectonic energy and reduce the 
seismic hazard by using special, reasonably organized impacts on the earthquake focus [57,58,74]. 
 
II. Earthquakes’ triggers   
II.1. Tides as earthquake triggers 
 
     It is known the exceptionally high sensitivity of the processes occurring in the focus of 
impending earthquake to external natural and artificial influences: for example, changes in the 
speed of the Earth's rotation, terrestrial tides, solar activity, weather events, earthquakes, creation 
of large reservoirs, development of deposits of oil, gas, solid minerals, pumping of liquid industrial 
waste, conducting underground nuclear tests, sounding the earth's crust with powerful electrical 
impulses, etc. 
     Any above-mentioned factors and among them certain exogenous (cosmic) triggering factors 
may exist in every seismoactive (s/a) region. They can play a triggering role  and correct the 
earthquake’s occurrence moment in the case when the focal area is on the limit of the critical value 
of the geological environment [12,24,32,49,58,67,72,73,89,92].      
     The task of determining the exogenous action on the region from the main celestial bodies for 
regions at any point and any moment of the time can be solved by taking into account their 
geographic coordinates[42,43].  
     As known the different total tectonic stress acts in the different regions because of plates 
movements particularities. In Caucasus tectonic stress is caused by advancement of the Arabian 
lithosphere plate to the North and its reapproachment[33,37]. 
Basing on the geological and geophysical data we can pick out: 
1. Interzonal deep faults of the Caucasian orientation, which divide the main tectonic units of the 
region. 
2. Interzonal longitudinal and transversal faults. 
3. Transzonal faults of the Anticaucasian and submeridional trend. 
     At present these faults determine heterogeneity of the Caucasian stress field, which is mainly 
characterized by the shear stress, directed diagonally towards the main structures and finally-by 
the tensile stress, directed parallel with the main structures. 
     Because, it is not possible to determine value of the force caused by plate’s movement and the 
task of N – body is not solved analytically yet, we investigated earthquakes exogenous triggering 
factors by numerical methods. 
     It is known that any planet is not only under the Sun attraction but under other bodies of the 
Solar system also. As the planets of the Solar system have a mass many times less than the Sun, 
the Sun and the Moon are considered as the “main bodies” of perturbation. 
     We consider earthquakes occurring moments connection with the Sun, the Moon attractive and 
gravity perturbation components of tide[37].  
     We have discussed all 393 Caucasus earthquakes of 1900-1992 years with M ≥4.5 (we have to 
underline that here, and below, where data of geophysical fields are elaborated, we were limited 
by data up to 1992 because, after 1992, due to certain objective reasons, getting reliable, systematic 
geophysical data in Georgia, was complicated). 
     In order to detail analysis of task, the Moon, the Sun and their total perturbation directions were 
calculated and inflicted on the Caucasus main faults map for each earthquake separately (For 
example: Fig.3,4,5).  
     We considered frequencies of recurrence of azimuths in intervals of tides possible directions. 

--- Sayfa 7 ---
 
7 
 
     Therefore, we had revealed triggering factors, the meanings of the azimuths of the Sun and 
Moon at the moment of the occurrence of the significant quantity of earthquakes, and estimated 
validity of the cases. 
     It was found out, that the sectorial effect is obviously shown in the Moon's gravity perturbations 
and in the total gravity perturbations of the Sun and the Moon (Table 1). 
Table 1.  
 
Table 1. Azimuths of the perturbation forces 
Triggering factor 
Azimuth  of the force 
direction 
Validity of the 
phenomena 
 
Perturbation from the Sun 
Perturbation from the Moon 
Total perturbation 
193◦–206◦ 
295◦–310◦ 
290◦–307◦ 
98% 
99.8% 
91.5% 
 
     It should be noted that the horizontal component of the gravitational field of lunisolar tides, for 
our latitude, is never directed to the north, i.e. it is never directed within a sector which azimuth is 
between 3230-310°.  
 
Fig. 3 
Figure 3. the Moon tide direction at Caucasus 1902 earthquake occurring moment; 

--- Sayfa 8 ---
 
8 
 
 
Fig. 4 
Figure 4. the Sun tide direction at Caucasus 1992 earthquake occurring moment 
 
Fig. 5 
 
Figure 5. total tide direction at Caucasus 1935 earthquake occurring moment (tide directions at 
the occurring moments of the earthquakes are marked by arrows). 

--- Sayfa 9 ---
 
9 
 
     Comparing the obtained results with the tectonic map of the Caucasus, we can conclude that 
the largest number of earthquakes in the Caucasus with М≥4.5 occurs when: 
1. The gravitational field and solar perturbation are perpendicular to the plane of the Russian 
Platform (i.e., perpendicular to the fault along the Caucasus ridge) and directed from North to 
South, in particular, creating angles of 20◦–30◦ with the 400 meridians. 
2. Lunar and total disturbances coincide with the direction of tectonic stress from approximately 
southeast to northwest (along the mentioned fault in the Caucasus seismically active region) and 
are known as tensile stresses. They create 600 angle with 400 meridian. 
     As for large earthquakes in Greece, the obtained results allow us to draw the following 
conclusion: earthquakes occur more often during moonrise or moonset, i.e. during the outflow 
(lunar tide), and strong earthquakes during the inflow. 
     Based on our study we concluded that in the case when similar works are carried out in any s/a 
region that can cause a trigger effect, we must take into account the regional tectonic stress 
situation, above described distributions of the Sun and Moon on the sky, and relevant time intervals 
as the periods of increasing danger of strong earthquakes occurring in the region. 
     Obviously, the stress acted on the Earth from the Sun and Moon, and, in our case, on the 
Caucasus, can play a role of the triggering factor only in case its direction helps to increase tectonic 
stress in this region. Of course, at the same time, these additional stresses affect neighboring 
regions (for example, Turkey and the Arabian Peninsula), but their tectonic stresses have other 
directions. Because of this the force acted on the Caucasus region, from the Sun and Moon, cannot 
play the role of the triggering factor for Turkey or the Arabian Peninsula. On the contrary, the 
exogenous stress added to Turkey's tectonic stress can appear as an earthquake initiative factor for 
Turkey and cannot play the role of the triggering effect for the Caucasus and Arabian Peninsula 
earthquakes. 
 
III. Earthquakes indicators 
III.1. Relatively weak earthquakes of the Caucasus as strong earthquake indicators 
 
     Many interesting papers are devoted to the seismicity changes regarding major earthquakes. 
There are revealed some seismic quiescence, and some seismic activations as well before 
comparatively strong earthquakes which have to been caused by regional geological particularities 
[9,10,56, 62,85,91]. 
     From the geological and geomorphologic viewpoints, Javakheti is one of the most complex and 
seismic active parts of southern Georgia (Caucasus)[35]. The majority (55%) of earthquakes 
observed throughout the Caucasus occur here. The question arises as to whether Javakheti reflects 
the regional geophysical processes. To find out if Javakheti is "sensitive" to strong earthquakes, 
we  considered 695 Javakheti relatively weak earthquakes (2.5 ≤M < 6.0) observed for 1961– 
1992 with regard to occurrence  moments of strong (M ≥ 6.0) 16 earthquakes. The change over 
time in the monthly number of weak earthquakes considered in relation to strong ones gave a rather 
vague picture. 
     To separate any possible anomalies from obtained distribution, we used the method of the 
Creeping Mean [23]. We smoothed data series, from 2 to 20 months in length, with a lag of one 
month until getting of the sharp picture. The 9-month series were found the most appropriate for 
analyzing (we have to note that 9-month series was chosen empirically as the best signal/noise 
ratio among other variants).  

--- Sayfa 10 ---
 
10 
 
     In the next step we have applied a qualitative or Sign-Changing Summation Method [23] which   
is quite convenient even in case when the amplitude of disturbances equals or exceeds the 
amplitude of “useful” anomalies. 
     Analysis of the results, by using a gradual approximation, makes possible to delineate the 
certain zone with margins from (+53.1) to (−51.8). The “useful” anomalies, observed beyond the 
zone, gave evidence of weak earthquakes “sensibility” to incoming strong earthquakes (Fig.6).  
 
 
 
Figure 6. Graph of anomalous distribution of Javakheti weak earthquakes towards Caucasus 
strong ones 
     By obtained graph, the minimal positive anomaly is equal to (7), and negative anomaly is (-8). 
4 earthquakes, out of all strong considered earthquakes, occurred during anomaly and all the rest 
earthquakes occurred by following: anomaly, aseismic periods and earthquake.  The average 
continuance of the aseismic period is estimated as 5.3 month (we underline that here and below 
all numerical values are graphical and they should not be relevant to real values. They are helpful 
in monitoring process). 
     At the next stage, we considered a similar task for the whole Caucasus region earthquakes. 
     Due to the fact that 2.5 M<4.5 earthquakes were not reliably registered before 1961, we 
divided the task into two parts. We considered: 
1. 4.5
M<6.0 earthquakes for 1900-1992 and 
            2. 2.5
M<6.0 earthquakes for 1961-1992. 
     33 strong (M
6.0) and 360 earthquakes with 4.5≤𝑀 < 6.0 occurred in the Caucasus in the 
period 1900-1992. After determination of  4.5 M<6.0 earthquakes number in each month, we 
used the method of the Creeping Mean, and with the same, above-pointed  opinion, stopped at the 
9-month series for smoothing.  
     After using of the qualitative method of separating the “useful” anomaly, and the gradual 
approximation method (we cut (+35) and (-43) zones), was clearly revealed the anomalous change 
of  Caucasus 4.5 M 5.9 earthquake number in time with respect to strong earthquakes occurring 
moments. 
     The minimal positive anomaly value is equal to (28), and negative – (-131). 11 earthquakes 
occurred by following: anomaly, aseismic period and earthquake, and other strong earthquakes 
occurred during anomalies. The average duration of the aseismic periods is equal to 8.9 month.  








--- Sayfa 11 ---
 
11 
 
     7064 earthquakes occurred in the Caucasus for 1961-1992   with 2.5 M<6.0. Similar to the 
two above tasks,  we estimated number of 2.5 M<6.0 earthquakes by month and after  we 
processing data by all above-pointed  methods (by gradual approximation method  we cut (+115) 
and  (-332) zones).   
     The minimal positive anomaly is estimated as (83), and minimal negative anomaly as (-45). All 
strong earthquakes occurred by the following sequence: anomaly, aseismic period and earthquake. 
The average duration of the aseismic period is 6.7 month.  
     In case of this task, it found out that, before only one earthquake  was not revealed an anomalous 
distribution of 2.5 M<6.0 earthquakes, and also only one anomaly was detected that was not 
followed by a  strong earthquake (a so-called "false alarm"). 
     We may underline that although in the discussed tasks we studied the different (695, 360, and 
7064) numbers of earthquakes with different magnitudes, a general regularity was revealed for the 
Caucasus region.    
     In order to isolate so-called "useful" anomalies, in all three cases, the 9-month smoothing 
method was selected as the best among the different variations and final results are obtained by 
using of the same qualitative method of anomaly isolation.  
     In the case of 31 out of 33 strong earthquakes an anomalous change in the number of 
earthquakes of different intensities (M<6.0) with respect to the occurrence moment of the strong  
earthquake was detected. In majority cases the following sequence is maintained: anomaly, 
aseismic period and earthquake. 
     Based on the generalization of the obtained results, it can be concluded that a special seismicity 
of earthquakes with 2.5 M<6.0  and 4.5 M<6.0  in the Javakheti, as well as in the entire 
Caucasus, reflects such a global process as the preparation of a strong (M >6.0) earthquakes in the 
region, and the region, as a unified tense system, is "sensitive" to the preparation of strong 
earthquakes, that is, the 2.5 M<6.0  and 4.5 M<6.0 earthquakes manifest themselves as 
"regional foreshocks". 
     We think that such specific seismicity of relatively weak earthquakes can be considered as an 
indicator of  strong earthquakes. 
 
III. 2. Specific variations of the atmospheric electric field potential gradient before the 
Caucasus  𝑴≥𝟓 earthquakes 
 
     Much attention is paid to the parameters of the atmosphere, for instance, such as it is an 
atmospheric electric field. Abnormal changes of the electric field potential gradient (EFPG) have 
been observed in the near-ground air before earthquakes in different regions of the world 
[31,68,69,70]. Authors have their opinions about the cause of the existence of this anomaly but 
there is no mutual agreement among them. 
     Our aim was to investigate a possible existence of “seismic share” in anomalous disturbances 
of atmospheric electric field. In order to study this task, we have considered Dusheti (Georgia, 
Caucasus) observatory’s EFPG records by hours from 1956 up to  1992 with respect to  Caucasus 
earthquakes 41  (M
5.0) occurrence moments[36]. 
     Investigation was carried out for 11-day EFPG data before earthquakes.  
     General picture of EFPG distribution did not show hopeful imagination for indicatory character 
of the considered parameter.  
     Knowing the nature of atmosphere’s electric field, first of all we should pay attention to its 
seasonal variations. Because of it, all data of EFPG were classified according to months and 









--- Sayfa 12 ---
 
12 
 
average quantity 𝑥̅ of background value was calculated for each month. In the next step we 
computed corresponding s dispersion, 
 deviation and 
, 
 and 
 significances 
for 11–day EFPG data  before all considered  earthquakes.  
     Anomalies, which are received by cutting off 
, 
 and 
 quantities from the 
EFPG data , were  named as “usual” anomalies of  I, II and III types correspondingly. 
     Of course, the problem of meteorological parameters’ influence on EFPG quantities should 
have been considered during data analysis. 
     As known, the average meaning of EFPG for Dusheti Observatory is 84 V/m in normal weather 
conditions (low clouds amount is not more than 4, wind velocity is 4 m/sec or less, and there are 
no precipitations, thunders, and lightings). 
     In order to identify “clear” anomalies connected only with earthquakes, we have considered 7 
basic meteorological parameters: 1. low clouds, 2. CB clouds, 3. precipitations, 4. wind, 5. air 
temperature, 6. relative humidity and 7. absolute humidity. Besides these parameters we have 
considered cases of thunders and lightings. All disturbances of atmospheric EFPG, which were 
provoked by thunders and lightings, were disregarded. 
     In order to exclude inter overlapping influence of meteorological parameters we have made 
attempts to estimate EFPG anomalous disturbances which were caused by above mentioned 7 basic 
meteorological parameters. Each meteorological parameter was divided into three groups: high 
(strong), average (moderate) and low (weak). 
     So we have received 21 “sorted out” meteorological parameters instead of 7. 
     On the basis of new 21 meteorological parameters we have created so-called “weather 
combinations” in the following way:  in case of fixed quantity of one meteorological parameter 
(for example, weak wind) we have considered such weather combinations when all other 
meteorological parameters are strong or high. 
     On the next stage, in case of the same value of the same parameter (weak wind), we have 
considered new weather combination, when the rest of parameters, except one (for example, 
precipitation) are high or strong, but precipitation is moderate. 
     Finally, we have received 2187 weather combination where none of possible variants is 
omitted. 
     The creation of so-called weather combinations enabled us to estimate corresponding average 
quantities of EFPG for every concrete weather situation and only then we have returned to 
previously identified “usual” three type anomalies and started to filter out them.   
     Due to filtration we have received new anomalies, which were named by us as “clear” 
anomalies of I, II and III type.  
     To our opinion all classes of “clear” anomalies are important, but the “clear” anomaly of the III 
type is the most significant because all randomness and disturbances due to weather effects are 
excluded.  These anomalies in the majority of cases, manifest themselves in 4 day’s period before 
M≥5.0 earthquakes.  Quantity of III type “clear” anomaly varies from (-152.1) V/m to (277.3) 
V/m (significant values comparing to average annual quantity of atmospheric EFPG for Dusheti 
observatory). Duration of III type “clear” anomalies vary from 40 to 90 minutes and are revealed 
in 29 cases (71 %) out of 41 discussed earthquakes of the Caucasus. 
     We have tried to reveal a correlation from one side, between values of EFPG anomalies and 
earthquake magnitudes values, and from another side, between values of EFPG anomalies and 
epicentral distances (from Dusheti Observatory), but we have not revealed any interesting relations 
for the Caucasian region. 
     Therefore, the “clear” anomaly of the III type is recognized as an earthquake indicator. 



x

2

x

3

x


x

2

x

3

x

--- Sayfa 13 ---
 
13 
 
 
III.3.   A study of atmospheric pressure variations that existed prior to an earthquakes 
 
     In scientific works, among the meteorological processes occurring during the period of 
earthquake preparation, variations in the atmospheric baric field are often considered as the 
initiating factor of an earthquake [30,50,71]. To confirm this view, as an example, it is cited the 
change in atmospheric pressure relative to the Chile earthquake (1960, 21 May, M = 8.5) occurring 
time and is concluded that in that case there were strong disturbances of the atmospheric bar field. 
Similar effects are observed during catastrophic earthquakes in different regions [1,64,87,88].  
     In order to reveal the anomalous effects of atmospheric pressure relative to the earthquake 
occurrence moment and the epicenter, we examined 40 earthquakes (M ≥4.5) in the Caucasus 
region during 1966-1992 years.  
     Based on the atmospheric pressure isobaric maps, the time-variations of the 7-day atmospheric 
pressure data for 5 days before and 2 days after the earthquake was evaluated. 
     Since the epicenters of earthquakes are located at different heights from the sea level, for the 
accuracy of the atmospheric pressure values, each record was brought to the corresponding 
pressure value regard to epicenters heights  (as a result, we got the so-called pressure reduced 
values).        
     All considered 7-day curves of changes in atmospheric pressure relative to the epicenters and 
the occurring moments of considered earthquakes were very indeterminate for analysis.         
Therefore, for revealing possible anomalous change we used Sign-Changing Summation Method 
[23].  
     As a result, we got a different curves, one example of which is presented in Fig. 7.  Based on 
the analysis of the obtained curves for all earthquakes, out of 40 considered earthquakes, 
depending on the epicenters of earthquakes and the moments of their occurrence, a sharp 
anomalous change in atmospheric pressure values was found in cases of 34 earthquakes. For each 
earthquake, we estimated the  quantity of the atmospheric pressure change  by calculating the ratio 
of the atmospheric pressure gradient to its average value corresponding to the specific 7-day period 
under consideration. 
     It was found that for the cases of only two earthquakes, the quantity of atmospheric pressure 
change is 10-3, and in all other 32 cases it equals to 10-4. 
 
 
Figure 7. The curve obtained as a result of the processing of atmospheric pressure data with 
respect to the 1986.05.13 earthquake occurring moment by Sign-Changing Summation Method. 

--- Sayfa 14 ---
 
14 
 
zone, causes the generation of electro-telluric variations. In this case, the telluric current obtains a 
vertical direction from the earth to the ionosphere, causing the polarization of the magnetic field, 
and besides the earth's surface gets the positive potential. Such allocation of fields coincides 
exactly with the distribution of the same fields in bad weather conditions which is companied by 
atmospheric pressure changing [41]. 
     Thus, variations of atmospheric pressure are related to changes in the telluric field, which 
occurs in all regions during both earthquake preparation periods and bad weather. Therefore, we 
think, that the atmospheric pressure anomalies, revealed by us, may be considered as an earthquake 
indicator. Taking into account works mentioned above, it is not excluded that the anomalous 
changes in atmospheric pressure towards earthquake occurrence moment, have a dual, indicatory 
and trigger nature. 
 
III. 4. Earthquakes and related anomalous ULF electromagnetic radiation 
 
     The dynamic processes in the earthquake preparation zones can produce current systems of 
different kinds [44,53] which can be local sources for electromagnetic waves at different 
frequencies, including ULF. These waves can propagate through the crust and reach the earth’s 
surface, unlike high-frequency waves [7,25,29,48,82].  
     Thus, in ground-based observations, we could expect some ULF signals of seismic origin 
observed in both geoelectric and geomagnetic fields [44,79,80]. Their disturbances in the 
preparation zone were considered a factor of such importance that in a number of works it was 
proposed to use telluric variations as a short-term precursor of strong earthquakes [46,76,81,82,83].  
     However, research does not prove this fact. 
     Since tectonic stress basically "works" for the formation of the main fault in the earthquake 
focus, in other parts of the seismogenic area, it can no longer form the necessary conditions for the 
occurrence of an earthquake. However, tectonic stress can cause perturbations of the geophysical 
fields in the seismogenic area. 
     As a result of the growth of tectonic stress, heterogeneity appears in earthquake preparation 
areas [21], and like to “Frankel’s generator” this segment of the earth's crust will have inductive 
polarization [20,47,53]. Generally, polarization charge should be perturbated over some surfaces 
[90]. Indeed, experimentally has been proved that electric dipoles appear on their surface 
[16,17,19,22].  
     This polarization charge takes part in two different processes: 
     a) If microcracks coalesce in the form of any size rupture nucleus (including the main fault) 
and in the fault plane there are changes in the specific electrical resistance of the rocks, that is 
there are inclusions of high electric conductivity, it is not excluded that the fault and the layer on 
which the polarization charge is distributed,  might be locked by a vertical electric field like a 
double-wire conduction layer, which form an oscillating contour-like structure. 
     At the certain stage of earthquake preparation, the avalanche-like process of fault formation 
begins and ends with an earthquake, accompanied by emissions of electromagnetic waves of 
VLF/LF frequency. The value of the electromagnetic wave frequency emitted at this time 
depends on the length of the fault.  In the case of small cracks, the electromagnetic radiation will 
be of the order of MHz, and in the case of cracks of the order of km, it goes into kHz [38,40].        
     b) In areas where tectonic stress is not able to form a crack, and because, in general,  rock 
density increases with depth, in case of the same tectonic stress effect, more inhomogeneities 

--- Sayfa 15 ---
 
15 
 
appear in the upper rocks with lower density compared to the lower rocks, that is, in the upper 
rocks more polarization charges are generated compared to the lower ones. 
     However, since the polarization charge must be distributed over some surface, each of these 
surfaces will be approximately equipotential [90].  
     The work done during the movement of the charge   𝑞0  on the ∆𝑙  element of the equipotential 
surface is equal [84]: 
∆𝐴= 𝑞0(𝜑1 -𝜑2)    (3) 
This work can also be represented by means of field tension:                     
∆𝐴= 𝑞0𝐸∆𝑙𝑐𝑜𝑠𝛼   (4) 
According to formulas (3) and (4): 
𝑞0𝐸∆𝑙𝑐𝑜𝑠𝛼= 0 
and since 𝑞≠0;  𝐸≠0;  ∆𝑙≠0, therefore  𝑐𝑜𝑠𝛼= 0  i.e.   𝛼=
𝜋
2. 
     Since the lines of force in any electrostatic field are perpendicular to the equipotential surfaces 
and the voltages are summed vectorially, the total direction of the voltages of the electric field 
created by the polarization charges of these inhomogeneities will be the same. 
     It is known that telluric electric field at any point change its direction and magnitude all the 
time. At the same time at perturbation telluric field becomes linearly (or plainly) polarized. 
Therefore, one has to assume that under conditions of increasing tectonic stresses, the telluric field 
is predominantly perturbed and polarized. If we exclude the effects that external factors can cause, 
the changes in this field in a given area will uniquely depend on the changes in tectonic stresses.  
     Thanks to contact of solid or gaseous phases existing between the earth and atmosphere, 
diffusion of electrons and ions and ion adsorption take place, which conditions the creation of a 
stable electric layer (dipole layer) on the contact. In this layer, the electric field, supported by 
factors conditioned by earthquake preparation, can be called an “additional” electric field and can 
be marked as En (5). The electric field potential at the separating border of these two mediums 
suffers discontinuation, which equals contact “additional” electric field strength:  
dn
E add
n
add


2
1

  (5) 
where 1 and 2 points are located on both near boundary of the contact surface. The fact of the 
mentioned field discontinuation will be expressed in all geophysical phenomena connected with 
the “additional “field [45] (Fig. 8): 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Perturbed Telluric current. 

--- Sayfa 16 ---
 
16 
 
     Since the charges move in the direction of the field line, at this time the electric current 
generated in the rock, is caused by the changes in mobility of charged dislocations [77] and/or 
point defects [21].Obviously, under these conditions, the direction of the telluric current, will be 
polarized and directed vertically in the direction of the Earth-Ionosphere, which also is observed 
in nature [63].    
     Telluric current is practically a synonym for geoelectric potential difference and  preseismic 
telluric current signals, called seismic electric signals (SES) [60].               
     As this current is associated with the displacement of charges, it releases heat (changing the 
orientation of the dipoles causes heat release) [84], so the temperature in this area will increase, 
which is also confirmed by the experiment [66,75]. 
     The telluric current will generate a magnetic field by induction, and as a result of the current 
changes in the Earth's crust the anomalous magnetic field variations start (which, according to 
Maxwell equations, should be accompanied by a strong SES activity)[6].  
     According to Maxwell's theory, in the case of plane electromagnetic waves, a change in the 
electric field directed along the axis OZ leads to the generation of a magnetic field directed along 
the axis OY(8). 
                                                            𝜀𝜀𝑜    
𝜕𝐸𝑧
𝜕𝑡=
𝜕𝐻𝑦
𝜕𝑥     (6) 
i.e. the induced magnetic field will also be polarized due to the polarization of the its OY 
component (Fig. 8), which is observed in nature during earthquakes[4,5,8 ,10,27,28,48]. 
     Unlike the electric field, which suffers discontinuation at the Earth-Atmosphere boundary, the 
induced magnetic field propagates in the Earth-Ionosphere zone, creating a polarized eddy electric 
field in the atmosphere. 
     The perturbated magnetotelluric field should manifest itself already at the first stage of the main 
fault formation. This fact was confirmed by laboratory and field observation [54,60].  
     It should be taken into consideration that magneto-telluric field perturbation will take place not 
only during the period preceding the earthquake but also after it too, till tectonic stress accumulated 
in the focal area is released completely [55]. 
     Thus, during the preparation, occurrence, and subsequent period of the earthquake, including 
the aftershocks attenuation, changes in the telluric currents are directly related to changes in 
tectonic stress, so this field should be considered only as an indicator of an earthquake. 
 
Results: 
     Anomalous fields, observed in the seismogenic area during the earthquake formative period, 
must be divided into three groups: earthquake triggering factors, earthquake indicators, and 
earthquake precursors, which can be defined as follows: 
     1. The physical field that exists independently of the earthquake preparation process should be 
considered as an earthquake trigger (natural or man-made) if at the final stage of earthquake 
preparation when tectonic stress reaches the limit of the solidity of the geological medium, can 
affect the tectonic stress and correct the time of earthquake occurrence  (for example, tides, in 
some cases changing of atmospheric pressure, reciprocal - influences of earthquakes, water level 
rapid change in reservoirs, etc.). 
     2. An indicator of earthquakes can be considered a physical field that, due to the earthquake 
formative process, undergoes abnormal changes since a certain period of earthquake preparation 
but it should be emphasized that the origin of the earthquake indicator is not caused by the direct 
geological process of the main fault formation. It is caused by perturbations of geophysical fields 
in seismogenic (mostly focal) areas (e.g. earth magnetic field anomalies, changes of atmospheric 

--- Sayfa 17 ---
 
17 
 
electric field potential gradient, telluric field anomalies, gases emissions from rocks, TEC 
anomalies and etc.). 
     Therefore, "earthquake indicators" can be called those anomalous changes of geophysical 
fields, which are caused by the side effects of earthquake preparation process, cannot analytically 
describe the process of main fault formation, that is, these fields are not useful to predict the 
earthquake. 
     3. The true precursor  (VLF/LF EM emissions) of an earthquake (simply, a precursor of an 
earthquake) is a physical field, which is caused by the process of the main fault formation in the 
focal area of the impending earthquake at the expense of the arising and coalescence of the cracks. 
By reflecting this process on the Earth's surface, an anomalous change in the parameter of this 
field (or parameters) makes it possible simultaneously to predict the magnitude, occurrence time  
and location of an impending earthquake with high accuracy. Our study found that VLF/LF EM 
emissions are responsible for earthquake short-term prediction. 
 
 
Global Implications and Future Perspectives 
To search for natural disasters such as earthquakes is one of the prime goals of the Natural 
Sciences. Besides taking hundreds and thousands of human lives, devastating earthquakes can 
have a very pernicious effect on infrastructures like, for instance, mines, reservoirs, atomic power 
stations (APSs), etc., which in turn may lead to ecological disasters with long-lasting consequences 
for the affected region. Many secondary effects induced by earthquakes (landslides, debris flows, 
avalanches, etc.) bring extensive damage to the seismic active countries. The rate of risks 
associated with these hazards increases every year due to the appearance of new complicated 
technological construction. Studies of earthquake problems in the world were especially 
intensified in the second half of the past century since alongside theoretical studies it became 
possible to carry out high-level laboratory and satellite experiments. Thanks to them in the 
earthquake preparation process various anomalous changes in geophysical fields have been 
revealed in the lithosphere as well as in the atmosphere and ionosphere.  Among the anomalous 
geophysical phenomena preceding earthquakes, specific attention is attributed to the earth's 
electromagnetic emissions before earthquakes. In recent decades, the networks for collecting 
VLF/LF radio signals have been organized in many seismically active countries of the world. The 
role of electromagnetic emissions networks is most important because they enriched science with 
invaluable information and made the problem study far more wide-scale. 
     Satellite and ground-based observations proved the presence of VLF/LF and ULF 
electromagnetic emissions before large earthquakes. Besides, laboratory, as well as field 
experiments, showed that electromagnetic emissions are connected with the appearance of faults. 
Extremely interesting works of known scientists are dedicated to the earthquake problem, but the 
possibility of its prediction, that is, the possibility to determine simultaneously the time and place 
of its occurrence and its magnitude by a definite accuracy is not seen up to now. 
       Researchers are still faced with complete disclosure of ongoing physical processes in the zone 
of earthquake preparation, and associations between many important and interesting precursor 
phenomena. This process, of course, requires the creation of a harmonized holistic theory, as a 
grandiose scientific and practical problem awaiting its solution. 
            In the presented work, based on a model of electromagnetic radiation generation created 
on the principles of electrodynamics, the authors propose theoretical and experimental studies of 
a precursor capable of predicting earthquakes. There are considered earthquake exogenous trigger 

--- Sayfa 18 ---
 
18 
 
and indicators for the Caucasus s/a region that clearly demonstrate differences between them and 
earthquake precursor and show the necessity to separate them from each other. 
     To solve the earthquake problem globally in the shortest time, it is necessary: 
 
First, in order to guarantee a short-term prediction of a strong earthquake in any country, 
it is necessary to organize a network of mobile VLF/LF EM radiation receivers, since their 
mobility ensures the detection of the entire spectrum of VLF/LF EM radiation. 
 
Second, to carry out a deep analysis of the features and the mechanism of occurrence of all 
anomalous geophysical fields that existed before the earthquake, in order to distinguish the 
trigger, indicator, and precursor of an earthquake from each other. 
 
           Third, it is necessary to renew work in direction of seismic risk reduction by reducing the    
           accumulated tectonic stresses based on earthquake prediction possibility. 
 
 
Conflicts of Interest 
The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
Acknowledgements 
The authors are grateful to the network INFREP for providing us with the MHz and kHz fractal-
electromagnetic emissions data used in this paper. 
 
References: 
1. Alejandro, A.C.B., Ringler, A.T., Wilson, D. C, Anthony, R. E., Moore, S. V.(2020). 
Towards understanding relationships between atmospheric pressure variations and 
long-period horizontal seismic data: a case study. Geophysical Journal International, 
Volume 223, Issue 1, 676–691.   
2. Biagi, P.F. (1999). Seismic effects on LF radiowaves. In: Hayakawa, M. (Ed.), 
Atmospheric and Ionospheric Electromagnetic Phenomena Associated with 
Earthquakes. TERRAPUB, Tokyo, 535–542. 
3. Biagi, P.F., Magippinto, T., Schiavulli, L., Ligonzo, T., Ermini, A. (2013). European 
network for collecting VLF/LF radio signals (D5.1a). DPC-INGV-S3 project. Short 
Term Earthquake prediction and preparation. 
4. Bleier, T., Dunson, C., Maniscalco, M., Bryant, N., Bambery, R., Freund, F. (2009). 
Investigation of ULF magnetic pulsations, air conductivity changes, and infra red 
signatures associated with the 30 October Alum Rock M5.4 earthquake. Nat. Hazards 
Earth Syst. Sci. 9, 585–603. http://dx.doi.org/10.5194/nhess-9-585-2009. 
5. Bleier, T., C., Dunson, C., Alvarez, F., Freund, R., Dahlgren (2010). Nat. Hazards Earth 
Syst. 
Sci., 
10, 
1965–1975. 
www.nat-hazards-earth-syst-sci.net/10/1965/2010/ 
doi:10.5194/nhess-10-1965-2010. 
6. Chapman, S., T., Whitehead (1922). The influence of electrically conducting material 
within the earth on various phenomena of terrestrial magnetism. Trans. Cambr. Ph. S. 
22, 25, 463-82. 

--- Sayfa 19 ---
 
19 
 
7. Chen, K. J., B., Chiu,  J.S., Wang,  C.Y., Lee,  C.H., Lin, and K.. Chao. (2011). 
Geomagnetic anomaly at Lunping before the 1999 Chi-Chi earthquake (Mw = 7.6) in 
Taiwan, Natural Hazards, 58 (3) 1233-1252. 
8. Chen, C. H., H.L., Hsu, S., Wen, T.K., Yeh,  F.Y., Chang,  C.H., Wang,  J.Y., Liu,  Y. 
Y., Sun, K., Hattori,  H.Y., Yen, P., Han (2013).  Evaluation of seismo-electric sing 
magnetic data in Taiwan anomalies using magnetic data in Taiwan. Nat. Hazards Earth 
Syst. 
Sci., 
13, 
597–604. 
www.nat-hazards-earth-syst-sci.net/13/597/2013/; 
doi:10.5194/nhess-13-597-2013. 
9. Chen, Chieh-Hung., Yang-Yi, Sun., Strong, Wen., Peng, Han., Li-Ching, Lin., 
Huaizhong, Yu., Xuemin, Zhang., Yongxin, Gao., Chi-Chia, Tang., Cheng-Horng, 
Lin., Jann-Yenq, Liu. (2020). Spatiotemporal changes of seismicity rate during 
earthquakes 2020. Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences, Volume 20, issue 
12,3333–3341.   
10. Chen, H. P., Han, K., Hattori (2022). Recent Advances and Challenges in the Seismo-
Electromagnetic 
Study: 
A 
Brief 
Review. 
Remote 
Sens. 
14, 
5893. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/rs14225893. 
11. Cirella, A. A., Piatanesi, E., Tinti, M., Chini, M., Cocco. (2012). Complexity of the 
rupture process during the 2009 L’Aquila, Italy, earthquake. Geophys. J. Int. 190, 607–
621, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-246X.2012.05505.x 
12. Davidson, S. (2005). High Tides Trigger Earthquakes, Gravity Concepts, Sec. 30, Rev. 
1. 
13.  Eftaxias, K., Kapiris, P., Dologlou, E., Kopanas, J.,  Bogris, N., Antonopoulos, G., 
Peratzakis, A., Hadjicontis, V. (2002). EM anomalies before the Kozani earthquake: A 
study of their behavior through laboratory experiments.  Geophysical Research Letters, 
VOL. 29, NO. 8, 1228, 10.1029/2001 GL013786. 
14. Eftaxias, K., Sgrigna, V., Chelidze, T. (2007a). Mechanical and electromagnetic 
phenomena accompanying preseismic deformation: from laboratory to geophysical 
scale. Tectonophysics 431, 1–301. 
15. Eftaxias, K., Panin, V., Deryugin, Y. (2007b). Evolution EM-signals before earthquake 
and during laboratory test of rocks. Tectonophysics 431, 273–300. 
16. Eftaxias, K., Athanasopoulou, L., Balasis, G., Kalimeri, M., Nikolopoulos, S., 
Contoyiannis, Y., Kopanas, J., Antonopoulos, G., Nomicos, C. (2009). Unfolding the 
procedure of characterizing recorded ultra low frequency, kHZ and MHz 
electromagnetic anomalies prior to the L’Aquila earthquake as preseismic ones Part 1. 
Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 9, 1953–1971. http://dx.doi.org/10.5194/nhess-9-1953-
2009. 
17. Eftaxias, K., Balasis, G., Contoyiannis, Y., Papadimitriou, C., Kalimeri, M., 
Athanasopoulou, L., Nikolopoulos, S., Kopanas, J., Antonopoulos, G., Nomicos, C. 
(2010). Unfolding the procedure of characterizing recorded ultra low frequency, kHZ 
and MHz electromagnetic anomalies prior to the L’Aquila earthquake as pre-seismic 
ones 
– 
Part 
2. 
Nat. 
Hazards 
Earth 
Syst. 
Sci. 
10, 
275–294. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5194/nhess-10-275-2010. 
18. Eftaxias, K., Potirakis, S.M., Chelidze,T. (2013). On the puzzling feature of the silence 
of precursory electromagnetic emissions. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., 13, 2381–2397. 
www.nat-hazards-earth-syst-sci.net/13/2381/2013/. doi:10.5194/nhess-13-2381-2013. 

--- Sayfa 20 ---
 
20 
 
19. Eftaxias, K., Potirakis, S.M., Contoyiannis, Y. (2018). Four-stage model of earthquake 
generation in terms of fracture-induced electromagnetic emissions. In Complexity of 
Seismic Time Series: Measurement and Application; A review: In Chelidze, T., 
Vallianatos, F., Telesca, L. Eds. Elsevier: Oxford, UK, 437–502. 
 
20. Frenkel, I.,I. (1949). Theory of the atmospheric electricity phenomena. Leningrad-
Moscow. (In Russian). 
21. Freund, F. (2000). Time-resolved study of charge generation and propagation in 
igneous rocks, J. Geophys. Res., 105, 11001-11019. 
22. Freund, F.T., Takeuchi, A., Lau, B.,W.,S. (2006). Electric currents streaming out of 
stressed igneous rocks – a step towards understanding pre-earthquake low frequency 
EM emissions. Phys. Chem. Earth 31, 389–396. 
23. Handbook of Geophysicist. (1990). Moscow, “Nedra”, 6, 469. (In Russian). 
24. Harris, R., A. (2000). Earthquake stress triggers, stress shadows, and seismic hazard, 
in: Special Section: Seismology, Current Science, 79(9), 1215–1225. 
25. Hattori, K., I., Takahashi, C.,  Yoshino, N., Isezaki, H., Iwasaki, M., Harada, K.,  
Kawabata, E., Kopytenko, Y., Kopytenko, P., Maltsev, V.,  Korepanov, O., 
Molchanov, M., Hayakawa, Y., Noda, T., Nagao, T., Uyeda, S. (2004). ULF 
geomagnetic field measurements in Japan and some recent results associated with 
Iwateken Nairiku Hokubu earthquake in 1998, Physics and Chemistry of the Earth, 29 
(4, 9) 481- 494.  
26. Hayakawa, M., Fujinawa, Y. (1994). Electromagnetic Phenomena Related to 
Earthquake Prediction. TERRAPUB, Tokyo. 
27. Hayakawa, M., Kawate,R., Molchanov,O.A., Yumoto, K. (1996). Results of ultra-low 
frequency magnetic field measurements during the Guam earthquake of 8 August 1993, 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 23, 241-244. 
28. Hayakawa, M., A.,  Schekotov, J., Izutsu, S.,Yang,S., Solovieva, M., Hobara, Y. 
(2022). Multi-Parameter Observations of Seismogenic Phenomena Related to the 
Tokyo Earthquake (M = 5.9) on 7 October 2021. Geosciences 12, 265. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ .   
29. Hayakawa, M., Schekotov, A., Yamaguchi, H., Hobara, Y. (2023). Observation of 
Ultra-Low-Frequency Wave Effects in Possible Association with the Fukushima 
Earthquake on 21 November 2016, and Lithosphere–Atmosphere–Ionosphere 
Coupling. Atmosphere, 14, 1255. https://doi.org/10.3390/atmos14081255 
30. Hernández, E. Z., & Arce, M. F. (2021). Atmospheric Pressure Anomalies over 
Earthquakes Epicenters. European Journal of Environment and Earth Sciences, 2(4), 
21–25. https://doi.org/10.24018/ejgeo.2021.2.4.150  
31. Hobara, Yasuhide., Mako, Watanabe., Risa, Miyajima., Hiroshi, Kikuchi., Takuo, 
Tsuda., Masashi, Hayakawa. (2022). On the Spatio-Temporal Dependence of 
Anomalies in the Atmospheric Electric Field Just around the Time of Earthquakes. 
Atmosphere 13(10), 1619. https://doi.org/10.3390/atmos13101619    
32. Ide, S., Yabe, S., Tanaka, Y. (2016). Earthquake potential revealed by tidal influence 
one arthquake size–frequency statistics. Nature Geoscience 9, 834–837 
33. Jackson, J. (1992). Partitioning of Strike – Slip and Convergent Motion Between 
Eurasia and Arabia in Eastern Turkey and the Caucasus, J. Geophys. Res., 97(89), 
12.471–12.473. 

--- Sayfa 21 ---
 
21 
 
34. Johnston, M., J., S. (1997). Review of Electric and Magnetic Fields Accompanying 
Seismic and Volcanic Activity. Surveys in Geophysics 18:  441–475. 
35. Kachakhidze M., N., Kachakhidze, R., Kiladze, V., Kukhianidze, G., Ramishvili. 
(2003). Relatively small earthquakes of Javakheti Highland as the precursors of large 
earthquakes occuring in the Caucasus. Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences 3: 
165–170. 
36. Kachakhidze N, M., Kachakhidze, Z., Kereselidze, G., Ramishvili. (2009). Specific 
variations of the atmospheric electric field potential gradient as a possible precursor of 
Caucasus earthquakes. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., 9, 1221–1226. www.nat-hazards-
earth-syst-sci.net/9/1221/2009/ 
37. Kachakhidze, M.K., Kiladze, R., Kachakhidze, N., Kukhianidze, V.,  Ramishvili, G. 
(2010). Connection of large earthquakes occurring moment with the movement of the 
Sun and the Moon and with the Earth crust tectonic stress character. Nat. Hazards Earth 
Syst. 
Sci.,10, 
1629–1633, 
www.nat-hazards-earth-syst-sci.net/10/1629/2010/ 
doi:10.5194/nhess-10-1629-2010.  
38. Kachakhidze, M.,K., Kachakhidze, N.,K., Kaladze,T.,D. (2015). A model of the 
generation of electromagnetic emissions detected prior to earthquakes. Physics and 
Chemistry of the Earth 85–86, 78–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pce.2015.02.010 
39. Kachakhidze, M., Kachakhidze-Murphy, N., Khvitia, B., Ramishvili, G. (2019). Large 
earthquake prediction methods. Open J. Earthq. Res. 8:239–254. 
40. Kachakhidze, M., Kachakhidze-Murphy, N. (2022). VLF/LF Electromagnetic 
Emissions Predict an Earthquake. Open Journal of Earthquake Research, 11, 31-43. 
https://doi.org/10.4236/ojer.2022.112003. 
41. Kachakhidze, M., Kachakhidze-Murphy, N., Khvitia, B. (2023). Earthquakes and 
related anomalous electromagnetic radiation. arXiv:2303.03652. Annals of Geophysics. 
Special issue: Developments in Earthquake Precursors Studies. In press.   
42. Kiladze, R., Kachakhidze, M., Kukhianidze, V., Kachakhidze, N., Ramishvili, G. 
(1997). Study of possible relationships between strong earthquakes and astronomical 
phenomena for seismoactive regions of the Caucasus, Turkey and Greece, Bulletin of 
Georgian Academy of Sciences, 155(N3), 367–369. 
43. Kiladze, R., Kachakhidze, M., Kukhianidze, V., Kachakhidze, N., Ramishvili, G. 
(2005). A Search of Possible Relations Between Large Earthquakes and Astronomic 
Phenomena: the Caucasian Seismic region, J. Vulkanol. Seismol., (N3), 75–80. 
44. Kopytenko, Y., V. Ismagilov, M., Hayakawa, N., Smirnova, V., Troyan, T., Peterson 
(2001). Investigation of the ULF electromagnetic phenomena related to earthquakes: 
Contemporary achievements and the perspectives, Annali di Geofisica, 44 (2) 325, 334.  
45. Kraev, A.,P. (2007). Natural regional electric fields. Overview of the scientific-
technical information. Report by the contract № 407-01. Novosibirsk. A. A. Trofimuk 
Institute of the Oil-and-Gas Geology and Geophysics, 86  (In Russian). 
46. Lazarus, D. (1993). Note on a possible origin for seismic electrical signals. 
Tectonophysics, 224, 265-268.  
47. Liperovsky, V,A., Meister, C.V., Liperovskaya, E.V., Bogdanov, V.V. (2008). On the 
generation of electric field and infrared radiation in aerosol clouds due to radon 
emanation in the atmosphere before earthquakes. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 8, 1199–
1205. http://dx.doi.org/10.5194/nhess-8-1199-2008. 

--- Sayfa 22 ---
 
22 
 
48. Liu, J.Y., C., H., Chen, Y.,I., Chen, H.,Y., Yen, K., Hattori, K., Yumoto. (2006). 
Seismo geomagnetic anomalies and M>5.0 earthquakes observed in Taiwan during 
1988-2001, Physics and Chemistry of the Earth, 31 (4-9) 215-222. 
49. Lopes, R.M.C., Malin, S.R., Mazzarella, A., Palumbo, A.(1990). Lunar and solar 
triggering of earthquakes, Phys. Earth. Planet. In., 59, 127–129. 
50. Mansouri Daneshvar M., R., Tavousi, T., Khosravi, M. (2015). Atmospheric blocking 
anomalies as the synoptic precursors prior to the induced earthquakes: a new climatic 
conceptual model. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 12:1705–1718. 
51. Migulin, V.V., Medvedev, V. I., Mustel, E. P., Parigin, V. N. (1978). Principles of 
oscillation theory. Moscow, ‘‘Nauka’’. Central Editorial Staff for Physical- 
Mathematical Literature, 391 p. (in Russian). 
52. Mjachkin, V.I., Brace, W. F., Sobolev, G.A., Dieterich, J.H. (1975). Two Models for 
Earthquake Forerunners, Pageoph., vol. 113, Basel. 
53. Molchanov, O.A., Hayakawa, M. (1998). On the generation mechanism of ULF 
seismogenic electromagnetic emissions, Physics of the Earth and Planetary Interiors, 
105 (3-4) 201- 211. 
54. Molchanov, O.A., Hayakawa, M. (2008). Seismo Electromagnetics and Related 
Phenomena: History and Latest Results, Terrapub, Tokyo. 
55. Moroz, U.F., T.A., Moroz, V.P,. Nazareth, S.A., Nechaev, S.E., Smirnov. (2004). 
Electromagnetic Field in Studies of Geodynamic Processes. Seismological and 
geophysical supervision on Kamchatka, pp.152-171, (In Russian). 
56. Nanjo, K.Z., Izutsu, J., Orihara, Y.M., Kamogawa, M.,  Nagao, T.  (2019). Changes in 
Seismicity Pattern Due to the 2016 Kumamoto Earthquakes Identify a Highly Stressed 
Area on the Hinagu Fault Zone. Geophysical Research Letter. 10.1029/2019 
GL083463   
57. Naumenko, B.N. The phenomenon of partial elimination of tectonic stresses by storm 
microseismics.Physics of the Earth, № 8, p. 72-75, 1979. (in Russian). 
58. Nikolaev, A.V. (1995). On the earthquake triggering by the Earth’s tide and 
underground nuclear explosions, in: Earthquakes induced by underground nuclear 
explosions, NATO ASI Series, 2-Environment, 255–266. 
59. Nikolaev, A.V. Induced seismicity. Science in Russian, 14-22, 1997. (in Russian). 
60. Orihara, Yoshiaki., Masashi, Kamogawa., Toshiyasu, Nagao., Seiya, Uyeda. (2012).  
Preseismic anomalous telluric current signals observed in Kozu-shima Island, Japan 
PNAS, November 20, vol. 109, no. 47, 19035–19510. www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.10 
73/pnas.  
61. Papadopoulos, G.A., Charalampakis, M., Fokaefs, A., Minadakis, G. (2010). Strong 
foreshock signal preceding the L’Aquila (Italy) earthquake (Mw6.3) of 6 April 2009, 
Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., 10, 19–24. 
62. Pondrelli, S., Salimbeni, S., Morelli, A., Ekstrom, G., Olivieri, M., Boschi, E. (2010). 
Seismic moment tensors of the April 2009, L’Aquila (Central Italy), earthquake 
sequence, Geophys. J. Int., 180, 238–242. doi:10.1111/j.1365-246x.2009.04418.x. 
63. Pulinets, S.A. (2009). Physical mechanism of the vertical electric field generation over 
active 
tectonic 
faults. 
Advances 
in 
Space 
Research 
44, 
767–773. 
www.elsevier.com/locate/asr; 
64. Ramesh., P., Singh, Waseem., Mehdi, Manish, Sharma. (2010). Complementary nature 
of surface and atmospheric parameters associated with Haiti earthquake of 12 January 

--- Sayfa 23 ---
 
23 
 
2010. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., 10, 1299–1305. www.nat-hazards-earth-syst-
sci.net/10/1299/2010/ doi:10.5194/nhess-10-1299-2010. . 
65. Rozhnoi, A., Solovieva, M., Molchanov, O., Schwingenschuh, K., Boudjada, M., 
Biagi, P.F.,  Maggipinto,T., Castellana, L., Ermini, A., Hayakawa, M.  (2009). 
Anomalies in VLF radio signals prior the Abruzzo earthquake (M = 6.3) on 6 April 
2009, Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., 9, 1727–1732. 
66. Saradjian, M.R., M., Akhoondzadeh. (2011). Thermal anomalies detection before 
strong earthquakes (M>6.0) using interquartile, wavelet and Kalman filter methods. 
Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., 11, 1099–1108. www.nat-hazards-earth-syst-
sci.net/11¬/1099¬/-2011/; doi:10.5194/nhess-11-1099-2011. 
67. Scholz, C.H., Tan, Y.J., Albino, F. (2019). The mechanism of tidal triggering of 
earthquakes 
at 
mid-ocean 
ridges. 
Nat 
Commun 
10, 
2526. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-10605-2 
68. Smirnov, S. (2008). Association of the negative anomalies of the quasistatic electric 
field in atmosphere with Kamchatka seismicity, Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., 8, 745–
749. 
69. Smirnov, Sergey. (2020). Negative Anomalies of the Earth’s Electric Field as 
Earthquake Precursors. Geosciences 10(1). 
https://doi.org/10.3390/geosciences10010010    
70. Su, Jianfeng.,  Hai, Chen. (2023). Study on the mechanism of atmospheric electric field 
anomalies before earthquakes. Results in Geophysical Sciences (Elsevier) Volume 15, 
100060. 
71. Sytinsky, A.D. (1985). The connection of the Earth's seismic activity with solar activity 
and atmospheric processes. L., 206 p. (In Russian) . 
72. Tanaka, S., Sato, H., Matsumura, S., Ohtake, M. (2006). Tidal triggering of earthquakes 
in the subducting Philippine Sea plate beneath the locked zone of the plate interface in 
the Tokai region, Japan, Tectonophysics, 417, 69–80. 
73. Tanaka, S. (2012). Tidal triggering of earthquake prior to the 2011 Tohoku-Oki 
earthquake (MW9.1). Geophys. Res. Lett. 39, L00G26. doi: 10.1029/2012GL051179.  
74. Tarasov, N.T., Tarasova, N.V., Avagimov, A.A., Zeigarnik, V.A. Influence of 
powerful hydromagnetic generator on seismicity of Central Asia and Kazakhstan. 
Volcanology and seismology, 4-5, 152-160, 1999. (in Russian). 
75. Tramutoli, V., V., Cuomo, C., Filizzola, N., Pergola, C., Pietrapertosa, (2005). 
Assessing the potential of thermal infrared satellite surveys for monitoring seismically 
active areas: The case of Kocaeli (Y´zmit) earthquake, August 17, 1999, Remote Sens. 
Environ., 96, 409–426. 
76. Triantis, D. C., Anastasiadis, I., Stavrakas. (2008). The correlation of electrical charge  
                    strain on stressed rock samples, Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., 8, 1243–1248.  
                    doi:10.5194/nhess-8-1243- 2008. 
77. Tzanis, A., F., Vallianatos. (2002). A physical model of electrical earthquake 
precursors due to crack  propagation and the motion of charged edge dislocations, In: 
M. Hayakawa and O. Molchanov (eds.), Seismo Electromagnetics: Lithosphere - 
Atmosphere-Ionosphere Coupling, TERRAPUB, Tokyo, 117-130. 
78. Ulomov, V. I. (1993). Ordering of geostructure and seismicity in seismoactive regions.  
Seismicity  and seismic zoning of Northern Eurasia, Moscow, Vol. 1, 27–31.  
79. Uyeda, S., T., Nagao, Y., Orihara, T., Yamaguchi, I., Takahashi. (2000).  Geoelectric   

--- Sayfa 24 ---
 
24 
 
potential changes: Possible precursors to earthquakes in Japan, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 
97, 4561–4566. 
80. Uyeda, Seiya. (2013). On Earthquake Prediction in Japan, Review, Proc. Jpn. Acad., 
Ser. B 89, No. 9, pp.391-400. 
81. Varotsos, P., N., Sarlis, E., Skordas,  M., Lazaridou. (2006). Additional evidence on 
some relationship between Seismic Electric Signals (SES) and earthquake focal 
mechanism, Tectonophysics, 412, 279–288. 
82. Varotsos, P. A., N.V., Sarlis, E.S. Skordas, E. S, (2011). Natural Time Analysis:The 
new view of time. Precursory Seismic Electric Signals, Earthquakes and other Complex 
Time-Series, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-
16449-1. 
83. Varotsos, Panayiotis A., Nicholas, V., Sarlis, Efthimios., Skordas,S. (2019). 
Phenomena preceding major earthquakes interconnected through a physical model. 
Ann. Geophys., 37, 315–324 https://doi.org/10.5194/angeo-37-315-2019. 
84. Vepkhvadze, G. (1995). General physics course. Electricity and magnetics. Tbilisi 
State university, 330 (In Georgian). 
85. Wang,  K., Chen,  Q. F., Sun,  S., Wang, A. (2006). Predicting the 1975 Haicheng 
earthquake, Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am., 96, 757–795, doi:10.1785/0120050191. 
86. Wang., Zhiliang, Yu., Surong: Characteristics of earth resistivity anomalies at 
Tengchong and other stations before the Lancang-Gengma M 7.6 earthquake, 
Earthquake (Beijing), (2) 42-47, 1989;  
87. Watada., Shingo, Takashi., Kunugi, Kenji., Hirata, Hiroko., Sugioka, Kiwamu., 
Nishida,  Shoji., Sekiguchi, Jun Oikawa.,  Yoshinobu, Tsuji.,  Hiroo,. Kanamori. 
Atmospheric pressure change associated with the 2003 Tokachi-Oki earthquake. 
GEOPHYSICAL 
RESEARCH 
LETTERS, 
VOL. 
33, 
L24306, 
doi:10.1029/2006GL027967, 2006.  
88.  West, J. D.,  Garnero, E., Shirzaei, M.( 2015).  Earthquake Weather: Linking 
Seismicity to Changes in Barometric Pressure, Earth Tides, and Rainfall. American 
Geophysical Union, Fall Meeting. abstract id. S13B-2835 
89. Yan., Ruyu, Xiaodong., Chen., Heping, Jianqiao., Xu, Jiangcun., Zhou. A review of 
tidal triggering of  global earthquakes. Geodesy and Geodynamics 14 (2023) 35-42.  
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geog.2022.06.005;  
90. Yoshino, T. (1991). Low-Frequency Seismogenic Electromagnetic Emissions as 
Precursors to Earthquakes and Volcanic Eruptions in Japan, Journal of Scientific 
Exploration, 5(I), 121–144. 
91. Zhang, Ying., Qinghua, Huang. Seismicity Changes before Major Earthquakes in 
Sichuan, China, Revealed by a Combination of the RTL Algorithm and ETAS Model. 
Seismological Research Letters 94 (2A), 844–851, 2023 
92. Zhang, Yuezheng., Hongguang, Ji., Haoyuan, Wu. Triggering and Relationship 
Between Mine Earthquake Activities and Stress of Earth Tides During Deep Mining. 
Front. Earth Sci., 13 July 2022. Sec. Geohazards and Georisks, Volume 10.  
https://doi.org/10.3389/feart.2022.889545. 
93. Zong, J., Tao, D., Shen, X. Possible ELF/VLF Electric Field Disturbances Detected by 
Satellite CSES before Major Earthquakes. Atmosphere 2022, 13, 1394.  
https://doi.org/10.3390/atmos13091394  
