
--- Sayfa 1 ---
An enrichment approach for enhancing the expressivity of neural
operators with applications to seismology
Ehsan Haghighata, Umair bin Waheedb, George Karniadakisc
aDepartment of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, 02139, MA, USA
bDepartment of Geosciences, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Dhahran, 31261, Saudi
Arabia
cDepartment of Applied Mathematics, Brown University, Providence, 02912, RI, United States
Abstract
The Eikonal equation plays a central role in seismic wave propagation and hypocenter
localization, a crucial aspect of efficient earthquake early warning systems. Despite re-
cent progress, real-time earthquake localization remains challenging due to the need to
learn a generalizable Eikonal operator.
We introduce a novel deep learning architec-
ture, Enriched-DeepONet (En-DeepONet), addressing the limitations of current operator
learning models in dealing with moving-solution operators. Leveraging addition and sub-
traction operations and a novel ‘root’ network, En-DeepONet is particularly suitable for
learning such operators and achieves up to four orders of magnitude improved accuracy
without increased training cost. We demonstrate the effectiveness of En-DeepONet in
earthquake localization under variable velocity and arrival time conditions. Our results
indicate that En-DeepONet paves the way for real-time hypocenter localization for velocity
models of practical interest. The proposed method represents a significant advancement
in operator learning that is applicable to a gamut of scientific problems, including those
in seismology, fracture mechanics, and phase-field problems.
Keywords:
Earthquake Localization, Neural Operators, DeepONet, machine learning
1. Introduction
The Eikonal equation is a cornerstone in a wide range of physical phenomena. It is
a fundamental non-linear partial differential equation (PDE) in the domain of geometric
optics [1], seismology [2], computer vision [3], and Hamiltonian mechanics [4]. In seismol-
ogy, the Eikonal equation is used to model wave propagation phenomena, particularly to
calculate the travel time of seismic waves through different geological layers. These wave-
fronts travel at speeds dictated by the material properties of the earth, and the Eikonal
equation enables the computation of these varying travel times based on spatially de-
pendent velocities. By accurately characterizing these times, seismologists can infer the
properties of subsurface geologies, such as rock type and structure, fluid content, pres-
sure conditions, and stress fields. The Eikonal equation, therefore, plays a crucial role
Preprint submitted to Elsevier
November 8, 2023
arXiv:2306.04096v2  [cs.LG]  6 Nov 2023

--- Sayfa 2 ---
in our understanding of the Earth’s interior, aiding in areas from resource exploration to
earthquake prediction.
The Eikonal equation is also pivotal in solving the earthquake hypocenter localiza-
tion problem – a fundamental task in seismology, encompassing the determination of the
initial rupture point or the hypocenter of an earthquake. The precise and prompt identi-
fication of the earthquake hypocenter holds substantial implications for earthquake early
warning systems, rapid response initiatives, and timely seismic hazard assessments [5].
Advancements in seismic network infrastructure, real-time data processing algorithms,
and machine learning have made significant strides in enabling more precise and timely
hypocenter localization. However, real-time hypocenter localization remains an elusive
goal for seismologists. This requires learning a generalizable Eikonal operator that could
be inferred in real-time for predicting hypocenter coordinates corresponding to variations
in seismic arrival times and velocity model.
Operator learning, i.e., learning non-linear maps from one infinite-dimensional Banach
space to another, seeks to identify the hidden mathematical operators that govern a given
dataset or a system, often expressed in terms of PDEs or integral equations.
In this
context, neural operators have emerged as a promising tool to build surrogate models for
obtaining near real-time simulation speeds [6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. Neural operators leverage neural
networks (NNs) to learn how to map complex relationships within classes of PDEs. They
have recently been applied to solve different problems under both data-driven and physics-
informed optimizations. Some of the operator learning methods include the Fourier neural
operator (FNO) [7], wavelet neural operator (WNO) [11], and the graph kernel network
(GKN) [8], to name a few. In particular, FNOs have received significant attention and
have also been used in seismology for two-dimensional wavefield [12] and travel time mod-
eling [13]. Nevertheless, their applications remain limited to two-dimensional problems as
incorporating Fourier transforms in three dimensions is computationally non-trivial.
Built on the foundations of the universal approximation theorem for operators [14],
a more general deep neural operator (DeepONet) has been developed by [6] that allows
one to fully learn the underlying operator and thus perform real-time predictions for ar-
bitrary new inputs and complex domains. DeepONets consist of two constituent parts:
a ‘branch net’ and a ‘trunk net.’ The branch net encodes the input function using a
predetermined number of sensors. The trunk net, on the other hand, encodes the contin-
uous solution operator as a function of the spatiotemporal inputs. These two networks
collaborate to transform the input data into the designated outputs. The unique archi-
tecture of DeepONets enables them to capture and learn complex operators directly from
data. Building upon this, Physics-Informed DeepONets (PI-DeepONets) augment the
capabilities of DeepONets by incorporating known physical laws or governing equations
as additional constraints during the training process [10].
Despite its success in learning operators for a variety of computational science and
engineering problems [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26], DeepONets show
weakness in learning operators in which the output solution moves spatially, correspond-
ing to variations in the input function (see Supplementary Materials). Therefore, in this
paper, we propose a novel DeepONet architecture, namely the Enriched DeepONet (En-
DeepONet), that overcomes the aforementioned limitation. This is particularly useful for
2

--- Sayfa 3 ---
learning the Eikonal operator, in which we map the observed travel times at seismic sta-
tions to travel time values for the entire computational domain. The hypocenter location
is then obtained by the coordinates of the minimum travel time value. Compared to the
standard DeepONet architecture, represented in Fig. 1-a, the En-DeepONet (Fig. 1-b)
leverages addition and subtraction operators as well as a newly introduced ‘root’ network
for constructing the surrogate model. Adding such operations resembles the enrichment
strategies in classical numerical methods like the Finite Element Methods [27, 28], hence
the name of the proposed architecture. A comparison of the En-DeepONet architecture
against the standard DeepONet architecture is presented in the Supplementary Materi-
als, highlighting up to four orders of magnitude improved accuracy without an increase
in training cost or the number of trainable parameters under both supervised and unsu-
pervised (physics-informed) optimizations.
We apply the proposed framework to earthquake localization under both variable ve-
locity and arrival time conditions that characterize real-world scenarios. We also study
the sensitivity of the framework in hypocenter localization with respect to noisy arrival
times. Through rigorous testing and evaluations, we observe the remarkable performance
of En-DeepONet in achieving near real-time localization capabilities even for highly het-
erogeneous velocity models. The ability to accurately localize earthquake hypocenters
amidst such variability is a significant advancement in the realm of seismology.
By harnessing the capabilities of the novel En-DeepONet architecture, our work ad-
dresses existing limitations and paves the way for more advanced and adaptable solutions
in seismology and beyond. With an improved understanding of seismic events and the
capability to predict them in near real-time, we can substantially improve the efficiency
of early warning systems. This, in turn, contributes to the broader objective of disaster
risk reduction, enabling quicker and more informed decisions during an earthquake event
to mitigate its impact and save lives.
2. Problem statement
2.1. Eikonal equation
We cast the source localization task as a traveltime modeling problem. Given first-
arrival traveltimes observed at seismic sensors, we build the traveltime field in the entire
computational domain using En-DeepONet. Once that is obtained, the hypocenter loca-
tion is given by the coordinates of the minimum traveltime value.
Given a source location xs and a velocity field v(x), the Eikonal equation provides
the first arrival traveltime field T(x). The Eikonal equation is expressed as
∥∇T(x)∥2 =
1
v(x)2,
s.t.
T(xs) = 0,
(1)
where ∇is the gradient vector. This PDE forms a nonlinear and hyperbolic first-order
partial differential equation that requires special solution methods. This equation implies
that the gradient of the arrival time surface is inversely proportional to the speed of the
wavefront.
3

--- Sayfa 4 ---
2.2. Earthquake hypocenter localization using Eikonal equation
The hypocenter localization problem is solved using the Eikonal equation through an
iterative inversion process that seeks to minimize the misfit between observed and calcu-
lated traveltimes [29]. This process begins with an initial hypocenter location guess and a
subsurface velocity model, followed by forward modeling to obtain theoretical traveltimes
at seismic stations. The misfit between the calculated and observed traveltimes is then
computed, and an optimization algorithm is employed to update the hypocenter location
accordingly. By repeating these steps until convergence or a predefined stopping criterion
is met, the hypocenter location is refined, ultimately providing a solution closely aligned
with observed traveltimes at seismic stations.
A number of methods have been developed over the years to solve the hypocenter
localization problem. Heuristic approaches, like the genetic algorithm [30] or simulated
annealing [31], are among the methods used to seek out the hypocenter with the least
error. Other approaches involve systematic searching or sampling techniques to gauge the
probability of the earthquake location over the model space [32, 33]. For instance, grid
search methodically covers the model space to calculate the probability distribution of the
hypocenter location. However, this approach can be computationally demanding due to
the repeated forward solutions and optimization process. Moreover, it is unable to meet
the need for real-time hypocenter localization. More recently, several deep learning-based
localization methods have been developed that have shown remarkable performance in
real-time localization [34, 35, 36]. However, their velocity generalization capabilities are
often in question.
2.3. Surrogate modeling using DeepONets
An alternative strategy involves solving the Eikonal equation for potential source loca-
tions a priori and constructing a surrogate model that encompasses all possible solutions,
using arrival times at seismic stations as inputs. If this surrogate model can be accessed
and queried in real-time, it enables rapid localization of an earthquake’s hypocenter.
While conventional neural networks may be employed for this purpose [37] with limited
efficacy, DeepONets have demonstrated exceptional capabilities as a robust and efficient
tool for building such surrogate models.
2.4. DeepONet: A Data-Driven and Physics-Informed Efficient Architecture for Surrogate
Modeling
Operator networks have recently emerged as promising tools for developing surrogate
solvers, which can provide instantaneous solutions based on various sensor readings. These
sensors refer to measurements of specific field variables at fixed locations. The network
architecture consists of two main components: a branch-net, which encodes the sensor
data, and a trunk-net, which approximates the continuous solution.
The outputs of
these networks, known as the embedding nodes, are combined through a dot product to
construct the final output or operator. The DeepONet architecture is expressed as [6]:
T(u)(x, t) ≈
p
X
k=1
bk(u1, u2, . . . , up)tk(x, t),
(2)
4

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Branch 
Net
Trunk 
Net
!x 
kAiujet+O4W19Y3NreJ2aWd3b/+gfHjU0nGqGDZLGLVCahGwSU2DTcCO4lCGgUC28H4dua3n1BpHstHM0nQj+hQ8pAzaqz0EPS9frniVt05yCrxclKBHI1+as3iFkaoTRMUK27npsYP6PKcCZwWuqlGhPKxnSIXUsljVD72fzUKTmzyoCEsbIlDZmrvycyGmk9iQLbGVEz0sveTPzP6YmvPYzLpPUoGSLRWEqiInJ7G8y4AqZERNLKFPc3krYiCrKjE2nZEPwl9eJa2LqndZrd3XKvWbPI4inMA
pnIMHV1CHO2hAExgM4Rle4c0Rzovz7nwsWgtOPnMf+B8/gDtC42T</latexit>b1
IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgbjm5n/+IRK81g+mEmCfkSHkoecUWOl+6Bf65crbtWdg6wSLycVyNHsl796g5ilEUrDBNW67mJ8TOqDGcCp6VeqjGhbEyH2LVU0gi1n81PnZIzqwxIGCtb0pC5+nsio5HWkyiwnRE1I73szcT/vG5qwis/4zJDUq2WBSmgpiYzP4mA6QGTGxhDLF7a2EjaizNh0SjYEb/nlVdKuVb2Lav2uXmlc53EU4QR
O4Rw8uIQG3EITWsBgCM/wCm+OcF6cd+dj0Vpw8plj+APn8wfuj42U</latexit>b2
J2aWd3b/+gfHjU0nGqGDZLGLVCahGwSU2DTcCO4lCGgUC28H4dua3n1BpHstHM0nQj+hQ8pAzaqz0EPSTfrniVt05yCrxclKBHI1+as3iFkaoTRMUK27npsYP6PKcCZwWuqlGhPKxnSIXUsljVD72fzUKTmzyoCEsbIlDZmrvycyGmk9iQLbGVEz0sveTPzP6YmvPYzLpPUoGSLRWEqiInJ7G8y4AqZERNLKFPc3krYiCrKjE2nZEPwl9eJa2LqndZrd3XKvWbPI4inMApnIMHV1CHO2hAExgM4Rle4c0Rzovz7nwsWgtOPnMf+B8/gBMlo3S</
latexit>bp
t1
t2
tp
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
b1 ⇥t1
b2 ⇥t2
. . .
bp ⇥tp
9
>
>
=
>
>
;
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
b1 + t1
b2 + t2
. . .
bp + tp
9
>
>
=
>
>
;
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
b1 −t1
b2 −t2
. . .
bp −tp
9
>
>
=
>
>
;
Root 
Net
Branch 
Net
Trunk 
Net
!x 
b1
r1q/qh69LBbBU0lKUY9FLx4r2lpoQ9lsJ+3SzSbsboQS+hO8eFDEq7/Im/GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgbj
m5n/+IRK81g+mEmCfkSHkoecUWOl+6Bf65crbtWdg6wSLycVyNHsl796g5ilEUrDBNW67mJ8TOqDGcCp6VeqjGhbEyH2LVU0gi1n81PnZIzqwxIGCtb0pC5+nsio5HWkyiwnRE1I73szcT/
vG5qwis/4zJDUq2WBSmgpiYzP4mA6QGTGxhDLF7a2EjaizNh0SjYEb/nlVdKuVb2Lav2uXmlc53EU4QRO4Rw8uIQG3EITWsBgCM/wCm+OcF6cd+dj0Vpw8plj+APn8wfuj42U</latexi
t>b2
BbBU0mkqMeiF48V7Qe0oWy2k3bpZhN2N0IJ/QlePCji1V/kzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZekAiujet+O4W19Y3NreJ2aWd3b/+gfHjU0nGqGDZLGLVCahGwSU2DTcCO4lCGgUC28H4dua3n1BpHstHM0nQj+hQ8pAzaqz
0EPSTfrniVt05yCrxclKBHI1+as3iFkaoTRMUK27npsYP6PKcCZwWuqlGhPKxnSIXUsljVD72fzUKTmzyoCEsbIlDZmrvycyGmk9iQLbGVEz0sveTPzP6YmvPYzLpPUoGSLRWEqiInJ7G8y4AqZERNLKFPc3krYi
CrKjE2nZEPwl9eJa2LqndZrd3XKvWbPI4inMApnIMHV1CHO2hAExgM4Rle4c0Rzovz7nwsWgtOPnMf+B8/gBMlo3S</latexit>bp
t1
t2
tp
X
(a)
(b)
T(u)(x)
T(u)(x)
8
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
:
u(x1)
u(x2)
u(x3)
. . .
u(xn)
9
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
;
Fb6GS8fugkJj0s=">ACNHicbZDLSgMxFIYzXut4q7p0EyxCuykz3pelbgQ3FWwrdE
rJpKdtMJMZkoy0DH0oNz6IGxFcKOLWZzCd1qLWA4GP/1xyzu9HnCntOM/W3PzC4tJyZ
sVeXVvf2MxubdUGEsKVRryUN74RAFnAqaQ43kQS+Bzq/u35KF+/A6lYK71IJmQ
LqCdRgl2kit7KXnQ5eJpBwQLVl/aMf5fstYM9L6WBKhyl57VCrb0kUbA9Ee9rbyuac
opMGngV3Ajk0iUor+2jm0TgAoSknSjVcJ9LNhEjNKIeh7cUKIkJvSRcaBgUJQDWT9Ogh
3jdKG3dCaZ7QOFV/diQkUGoQ+KbS7NdTf3Mj8b9cI9ads2bCRBRrEHT8USfmWId45CB
uMwlU84EBQiUzu2LaI5JQbXy2jQnu35NnoXZQdE+Kx1dHuVJ5YkcG7aI9lEcuOkUldIE
qIoukdP6BW9WQ/Wi/VufYxL56xJzw76FdbnF4AhqF8=</latexit>8
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
:
u(x1)
u(x2)
u(x3)
. . .
u(xn)
9
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
;
Figure 1: Illustration of alternative deep neural operators. (a) The standard DeepONet architecture
incorporates two sub-networks, namely the ‘branch network’ and the ‘trunk network.’ The function of
the branch network is to encode the input data, leveraging a set number of prearranged sensors. The
trunk network is used to encode the locations of the output function. Together, these networks allow
learning the transformation of input data into the designated output parameters. (b) The proposed En-
DeepONet architecture leverages the addition and subtraction operators, in addition to multiplication,
to combine the outputs of branch and trunk networks. We pass this output to a root network that helps
to learn more generalized mathematical operators.
with ui as the sensor readings at fixed locations, and bk and tk as outputs of branch and
trunk networks, as depicted in Fig. 1-a. bk and tk are embedding bases for the sensor and
solution networks.
Such a network construction can be trained under data-driven (supervised) or data-
free physics-informed (unsupervised) approaches. Of course, the training cost of the latter
is much more than the former because of Enriched computational graphs due to AD and
the more complex loss envelope and multi-objective loss function. Nevertheless, given a
set of inputs Y and sensor readings Ui at fixed locations and target data G, we can set
up the optimizer using the MSE loss function as follows:
arg min
θ∈RN
L = MSE(T(u)(x, t) −T ∗),
(3)
where θ represents the set of all trainable parameters, and T ∗represent the expected
values for the travel time. Given the continuous construction with respect to the spatio-
temporal input set y, we can also leverage AD to incorporate any PDE-based losses, just
like the standard PINN (for more details, see [10]).
2.5. En-DeepONet
Here, we propose a revised DeepONet architecture, namely, the Enriched-DeepONet
(or En-DeepONet for short), for traveltime modeling. Standard DeepONet architecture,
expressed in Eq. (3), demonstrated its effectiveness in addressing problems with variable
amplitude of the expected solution. However, in the context of earthquake source local-
ization, the solution itself shifts spatially as the hypocenter moves. We find that standard
DeepONet performs poorly in capturing such solutions, which is rooted in the use of the
5

--- Sayfa 6 ---
projection (multiplication) operator. We also find that adding summation or subtraction
operation—i.e., tk(x, t)±bk(u1, u2, . . . , up)—improves the learning capacity of DeepONets
significantly for such problems. Given that this operation does not reduce the output
dimension, we add an additional linear layer to reduce the output dimension to a single
output, similar to what a dot-product does. This is expressed mathematically as:
T(u)(x, t) ≈
p
X
k=1
w+
k (tk(x, t) + bk(u1, u2, . . . , up))
+
p
X
k=1
w−
k (tk(x, t) −bk(u1, u2, . . . , up))
+
p
X
k=1
w∗
k(tk(x, t) · bk(u1, u2, . . . , up)),
(4)
where, w◦
k are summation weights (linear layer) associated with each operation. Note that
setting w±
k = 0 and w∗
k = 1 recovers the original DeepONet construction, expressed in
Eq. (2). Finally, we can even further generalize the DeepONet architecture, by adding
a full neural network instead of the linear layer, namely RootNet, as shown in Fig. 1-b.
Therefore, we call this generalized construction the Enriched-DeepONet or En-DeepONet.
Therefore, the most general form of En-DeepONet is expressed mathematically as
T(u)(x, t) ≈r





t(x, t) · b(u1, u2, . . . , up)
t(x, t) + b(u1, u2, . . . , up)
t(x, t) −b(u1, u2, . . . , up)




,
(5)
where r(◦) stands for the output ”root” network.
3. Applications
In this section, we explore the application of the En-DeepONet architecture for instant
traveltime field estimation. To this end, we first explore its application to hypocenter
localization of the Marmousi velocity model [38], a highly heterogenous velocity model,
leading to highly accurate realtime predictions.
Furthermore, by considering a range
of simple and complex velocity models, we illustrate the capacity of En-DeepONet to
generalize over velocity model variations, ultimately harnessing the full potential of the
operator learning paradigm.
We first present a comparison of the En-DeepONet architecture against the standard
DeepONet architecture, highlighting the need for the addition and subtraction operators,
in addition to the multiplication operator used in the standard DeepONet construction,
to obtain optimal accuracy when the expected solution shifts with the change in sensor
position. We then apply the framework to a set of problems with increasing complexity.
All problems are set up in SciANN [39], a TensorFlow/Keras API optimized for physics
informed machine learning, and codes reproducing the results will be made public at
https://github.com/ehsanhaghighat/En-DeepONet.
6

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Figure 2: A standard physics-informed DeepONet solution for learning the distance function from a circle
with a variable radius. The red circles indicate the coordinates associated with zero distance and are
fed as input to the branch network. The standard DeepONet model shows high accuracy in learning the
distance function, compared with those computed using the fast marching method.
7

--- Sayfa 8 ---
3.1. Why En-DeepONet?
Let us consider the simplest form of the eikonal equation – the isotropic eikonal equa-
tion with a constant velocity model (v(x) = 1). This problem can be solved under both
data-driven and physics-informed optimizations, see [10], where the authors’ objective
was learning distance function from a circle with a variable radius. The inputs to the
branch network are the spatial coordinates (x, y) of a fixed set of nodes located on the
circle, which are associated with the zero distance. As we increase or decrease the radius
of the circle, x, y values are scaled proportionally. The results are plotted in Fig. 2. It
can be observed that the standard DeepONet model can accurately capture the solution
for various radii, with a maximum error of 1.3% of the true solution.
Next, we consider the sensors located on a circle with a fixed radius of 0.2m but with
a moving center to simulate the earthquake source localization problem. As one would
expect, for an isotropic medium with a constant velocity model, the emanating wave-
front propagates as a circle (in 2D) and only shifts with the location of the hypocenter.
To have a fair comparison, we set up the networks in such a way that the number of
trainable parameters are the same for both standard DeepONet and En-DeepONet net-
works. Accordingly, we use five hyperbolic-tangent layers with 50 neurons width, with
an output linear embedding layer of size 50, for both branch and trunk networks. This
choice results in 14,800 trainable parameters for the DeepONet architecture. For the case
of the En-DeepONet network, we use two layers with 50 neurons width for both branch
and trunk networks, followed by a two layer root network with 50 and 20 neurons re-
spectively, resulting in 15,891 trainable parameters. The activation functions are again
hyperbolic-tangent function.
The results are shown in Fig. 3. As can be seen, the standard DeepONet fails to learn
the solution under data-driven or physics-informed training, whereas the En-DeepONet
accurately captures the expected solution with remarkable accuracy. Both data-driven
and physics-informed (unsupervised) training are performed. The evolution of loss func-
tion and training times are shown in Fig. 3, where En-DeepONet outperforms standard
DeepONet significantly with the same training cost. The results are shown in Fig. 4.
As can be seen, the standard DeepONet fails to learn the solution under data-driven or
physics-informed training, whereas the En-DeepONet accurately captures the expected
solution with remarkable accuracy.
The reason the new architecture outperforms the standard architecture is intuitive. Let
us consider the analytical formula for a circular levelset with a fix radius R and centered
at the origin, i.e., ϕ(x, y) = x2 +y2 −R2. Moving the center of the circle to (xs, ys) results
in a levelset formula that is translated in (x, y), ϕ(x, y) = (x −xs)2 + (y −ys)2 −R2. We
can notice that the subtraction operator provides a more natural choice in this case. Now,
let us consider a more general case where levelsets form ellipsoids instead of circles, i.e.,
ϕ(x, y) = a(x −xs)2 + b(y −ys)2 −R2. We can note that the a and b parameters are now
multiplied to the other functions, which is the analogy we use to keep the multiplication
operator. Therefore, adding all operators is required to be able to address change in
center, anisotropy, and amplitude, and therefore the choice for enriched DeepONet.
This simple problem highlights that the addition or subtraction operators introduced
in this paper, in addition to the multiplication operator used in the standard DeepONet
8

--- Sayfa 9 ---
Data Driven
Physics-Informed (Unsupervised)
(a)                                                     (b)                                                               (c)   
(d) 
Figure 3: Standard DeepONet vs. En-DeepONet for variable source location with data-driven (a, b)
and physics-informed (unsupervised) training (c, d). The vertical axis is the normalized loss function,
and the horizontal axes are training epochs (a, c) and training time in seconds (b, d). The training is
conducted with a similar number of parameters, the same batch-size and epochs, so that it provides a
fair comparison between the two architectures. Note that En-DeepONet loss can be further improved as
the loss value is still reducing after 10,000 epochs.
construction, is necessary for optimal accuracy when the expected solution shifts with the
change in sensor position.
3.2. Source localization for the Marmousi velocity model
here, we consider a realistic setting for the hypocenter source localization problem
by using the highly heterogeneous Marmousi velocity model [38], shown in Fig. 5. We
consider 20 sensors (seismic stations) located at the surface of the velocity model. The
trunk network includes four layers with 20, 50, 100, and 100 neurons. The branch network
includes two layers with 50 and 100 neurons. The root network includes 5 hidden layers
with 100, 80, 60, 40, 20 neurons. Hyperbolic-tangent is used as the activation function,
with a final linear output layer, representing the travel time. We train En-DeepONet to
predict traveltimes in the entire computational domain. The coordinates of the minimum
traveltime value then form the hypocenter location.
We generate the training dataset by using the fast marching eikonal solver [40] for
200 randomly selected source locations within the Marmousi model. Here, the branch net
encodes the arrival times observed at seismic stations located on the top surface. Once
trained, we test our En-DeepONet model using 1000 randomly selected source locations
from within the velocity model. A few representative results are plotted in Fig. 6. As can
be seen, the solution remains very accurate even for such a heterogeneous velocity model,
which shows the potential application of the proposed framework for realistic problems.
A summary of the results is presented in terms of the root-mean-squared error (RMSE)
and absolute error histograms in Fig. 7. We observe that in most cases, the horizontal
and vertical location errors are less than 50 m. The vertical location errors are larger on
average than the horizontal ones, which is explained by the surface acquisition geometry
used in this test. Finally, we study the sensitivity of the location accuracy to noise in
the observed arrival times. Through absolute error and RMSE, Fig. 8 shows the location
accuracy remains largely accurate even for an extremely high noise ratio of 50%.
9

--- Sayfa 10 ---
Figure 4: Standard DeepONet vs.
En-DeepONet for variable source location with physics-informed
(unsupervised) training. Each column plots the distance field from a randomly located circle, with the
horizontal and vertical axes as the x, y coordinates. The plotted solutions correspond to three different
locations for the circle, computed using (a) the reference fast marching method (FMM), (b) the physics-
informed En-DeepONet, and (c) physics-informed standard DeepONet.
Figure 5: The highly heterogeneous Marmousi velocity model used in this study for assessing the hypocen-
ter localization capabilities of En-DeepONet.
10

--- Sayfa 11 ---
Figure 6: Analyzing the accuracy of traveltime fields predicted by the trained En-DeepONet model for
three representative source locations from the test set for the Marmousi model.
The En-DeepONet
solutions are plotted in the left column, the reference FMM solutions are plotted in the middle column,
and the relative errors are plotted in the right column. For each case, the relative error is evaluated as the
absolute percentage error normalized by its maximum traveltime. The trained En-DeepONet model takes
observed traveltimes on the surface as input and produces the traveltime field in the entire domain. The
hypocenter is then obtained by the location of the minimum traveltime value, and indicated by the red
stars. Despite the heterogeneity of the velocity model, the predicted traveltime field is highly accurate,
with maximum error values reaching only 2%.
(a)                                                        (b)
Figure 7: RMSE distribution of predicted traveltimes by the trained En-DeepONet model (a), and a
distribution of the absolute error in location coordinates (b), sampled over 1,000 random realizations for
the Marmousi model.
11

--- Sayfa 12 ---
(a)                                                                             (b)                                          
(c)
Figure 8: An assessment of the degradation in accuracy of the predicted traveltime fields and the resulting
locations due to the addition of noise to the observed traveltime picks. For a representative source location
in the Marmousi model, in (a), we plot the observed traveltimes (in black) and the resulting traveltime
curves by adding noise with varying ratios. In (b), we plot the evolution of the error in the estimated
source locations, averaged over 1,000 random realizations with corrupted traveltime inputs. Finally, in (c),
we show the evolution of the RMSE for traveltime predictions, averaged over 1,000 random realizations
with the corrupted traveltime inputs. Despite the added noise to the observed traveltimes, the source
location is predicted with high accuracy.
(a)                                                        (b)
Figure 9: (a) A representative velocity model generated by random sampling of velocity at corners of
the square and bilinear interpolation. (b) The En-DeepONet architecture with both velocity and receiver
branches, used to generalize over both the source location and the velocity model. We use two branch
networks – one for the velocity model (velocity branch) and the other for the observed traveltimes at the
receivers (receiver branch), and a trunk network. These branch and trunk networks are combined with
the En-DeepONet rules and then passed as input to the root network. The resulting output is a function
of the velocity model sampled at discrete locations, traveltime sampled at discrete receiver points, and
spatial coordinates.
12

--- Sayfa 13 ---
Figure 10: Analyzing the accuracy of traveltime fields predicted by the trained En-DeepONet model for
three representative velocity models (first column from the left) and source locations from the test set.
Also plotted are the corresponding traveltime fields predicted by the trained En-DeepONet model (second
column from the left), the corresponding FMM reference solution (third column from the left), and the
resulting absolute relative percentage error (fourth column from the left). The trained En-DeepONet
model takes observed traveltimes on the surface and the velocity model as inputs and produces the
traveltime field in the entire domain. The hypocenter is then obtained by the location of the minimum
traveltime value, and indicated by the red stars. Despite the challenge of varying velocity models, the
predicted traveltime field for a new velocity model and source location both is highly accurate.
13

--- Sayfa 14 ---
(a)                                                        (b)
Figure 11: RMSE distribution of predicted traveltimes by the trained En-DeepONet model (a), and
distribution of the absolute error in location coordinates (b), sampled over 1,000 random realizations.
(a)                                                                             (b)                                          
(c)
Figure 12: An assessment of the degradation in accuracy of the predicted traveltime fields and the
resulting locations due to the addition of noise to the observed traveltime picks. For a representative
source location and a velocity model, in (a), we plot the observed traveltimes (in black) and the resulting
traveltime curves by adding noise with varying ratios. In (b), we plot the evolution of average error in
the estimated source locations over 1,000 random realizations with corrupted traveltime inputs. Finally,
we also show in (c) the evolution of the RMSE for traveltime predictions, averaged over 1,000 random
realizations with the corrupted traveltime inputs. Despite the complexity of the problem, the solution
accuracy does not deteriorate much with the increasing noise levels in the observed traveltimes.
3.3. Source and velocity generalization for a smooth velocity model
As the next representative problem, we now consider a more complex setup. Given an
arbitrary velocity model and arrival times at seismic stations located at the top bound-
ary of the velocity model, we aim to build an En-DeepONet model for the hypocenter
localization problem. Here, we consider 20 seismic receivers, equally spaced on the sur-
face. We additionally consider 100 velocity sensors on a uniform grid inside the domain.
The trunk network includes five layers with 20, 50, 100, 100, and 100 neurons. Both the
velocity and the receiver branch networks include three layers with 100 neurons. A linear
layer is considered here for the root network. Hyperbolic-tangent is used as the activation
function. The final output represents the travel time.
To this end, let us consider a square domain, with its corners being assigned random
velocities drawn from a representative uniform distribution, i.e., v ∼U(0.2, 8)km/s, as
shown in Fig. 9-a.
The network architecture is depicted in Fig. 9-b.
Here, we need
two branch networks to parameterize the velocity models as well as arrival times. The
trunk network remains the same, with spatial coordinates as inputs. To generate the
14

--- Sayfa 15 ---
training data, we draw a random velocity model, as well as a random source location
from (xs, ys) ∼U(−0.9, 0.9)m, within the desired domain Ω= [−1, 1] × [−1, 1]. Solving
the eikonal equation using FMM provides us traveltimes needed to build the input-output
pairs for the training dataset. We generate 200 such samples to train our En-DeepONet
model, and then we test it on 1,000 random realizations.
Once trained, given a new velocity model from within the training distribution and
wavefront arrival times on the surface, we can instantly query the network to recover the
traveltime field and, therefore, the hypocenter location associated with the arrival time
and velocity model. The results for a few representative realizations are presented in
Fig. 10. The trained network is able to predict solutions associated with random source
location and velocity models very accurately. It is worth highlighting that the test velocity
models are not used during the training. However, as long as they are from within the
training distribution, we can expect the trained En-DeepONet model to generate highly
accurate solutions.
We consider 1000 randomly generated pairs of velocity models and hypocenter loca-
tions to test the localization accuracy. The RMSE of the traveltime field and and absolute
location error histograms are shown in Fig. 11. We observe extremely small location er-
rors, indicating that our En-DeepONet model is able to generalize well over the considered
family of smooth velocity models. Additionally, by corrupting traveltimes observed at re-
ceivers using random noise with different ratios (Fig. 12-a), we can evaluate the average
error in source location and traveltime RMSE as a function of noise ratio, as shown in
Fig. 12-c-d. We observe that for a large portion of samples, the traveltime predictions
and the estimated source location remain highly accurate, underscoring the efficacy of the
proposed approach for practical scenarios.
3.4. Source and velocity generalization for the OpenFWI velocity models
Finally, as a challenging test case, we consider a family of velocity models from the
OpenFWI velocity dataset. OpenFWI represents a comprehensive suite of large-scale,
multi-structured datasets, specifically curated for enhancing machine learning applications
in seismic Full Waveform Inversion (FWI) [41].
OpenFWI provides access to twelve
different families of velocity models, in varying degrees of complexity. For our study,
we choose the CurveFault-B family of velocity models, representing extremely complex
geologic conditions. A few samples from this family of velocity models are shown in Fig. 13.
In this problem, we consider 30 seismic receivers, equally spaced on the surface. We
additionally consider 14×14 uniformly distributed velocity sensors inside the domain. The
trunk network includes nine layers, each with 50 neurons. The velocity branch includes
five layers with 100, 80, 50, 50, and 50 neurons, while the receiver branch includes five
layers, each with 50 neurons. Finally, the root network includes 8 hidden layers, each
with 50 neurons, and a final output linear layer that represents the travel time. The
hyperbolic-tangent function is used as the activation function.
Similar to the previous case, we train the En-DeepONet model (Fig. 9-b) to learn the
variations in the resulting traveltime field w.r.t. variations in both the observed arrival
times and the velocity model. Using FMM, we generate 200 input-output pairs of the
training dataset by considering different velocity models from the dataset and source
15

--- Sayfa 16 ---
Figure 13: A few representative velocity models from the CurveFault-B family of velocity models in the
OpenFWI dataset [41].
Figure 14: Analyzing the accuracy of traveltime fields predicted by the trained En-DeepONet model for
three representative velocity models from the OpenFWI dataset (first column from the left) and source
locations from the test set. Also plotted are the corresponding traveltime fields predicted by the trained
En-DeepONet model (second column from the left), the corresponding FMM reference solution (third
column from the left), and the resulting absolute relative percentage error (fourth column from the left).
The trained En-DeepONet model takes observed traveltimes on the surface and the velocity model as
inputs and produces the traveltime field in the entire domain. The coordinates of the minimum traveltime
value then yield the hypocenter location that are indicated by the red stars. Despite the challenge of
dealing with a highly complex set of velocity models, the predicted traveltime fields are generally accurate
for most part of the computational domain.
16

--- Sayfa 17 ---
(a)                                                        (b)
Figure 15: RMSE distribution of predicted traveltimes by the trained En-DeepONet model (a), and
distribution of the absolute error in location coordinates (b), sampled over 1,000 random realizations for
the CurveFault-B family of velocity models in the OpenFWI dataset.
(a)                                                                             (b)                                          
(c)
Figure 16: An assessment of the degradation in accuracy of the predicted traveltime fields and the
resulting locations due to the addition of noise to the observed traveltime picks. For a representative
source location and a velocity model, in (a), we plot the observed traveltimes (in black) and the resulting
traveltime curves by adding noise with varying ratios. In (b), we plot the evolution of average error in
the estimated source locations over 1,000 random realizations with corrupted traveltime inputs. Finally,
we also show in (c) the evolution of the RMSE for traveltime predictions, averaged over 1,000 random
realizations with the corrupted traveltime inputs. The solution accuracy is generally lower than earlier
but expected due to the complexity of learning an operator corresponding to the complex CurveFault-B
family of the OpenFWI dataset.
17

--- Sayfa 18 ---
locations.
Once trained, we evaluate the performance of the En-DeepONet model by
feeding new velocity models and the corresponding arrival times observed on the surface
from the test set. A few representative results are shown in Fig. 14. We notice that despite
being from the same family, the velocity models vary significantly compared to each other.
Despite the huge differences in velocity models, the trained En-DeepONet model yields a
traveltime map with reasonable accuracy for most of the computational domain. While
the errors are certainly larger than in the previous test cases, this challenging family of
velocity models is deliberately chosen to test the limits of the proposed algorithm.
We present a summary of these tests through an RMSE distribution of the traveltime
field and a histogram of location errors in Fig. 15. While in most cases, the location
errors in both the horizontal and vertical directions are less than 200 m, there are some
instances in which these errors exceed 500 m, which suggests further improvements may
be needed before the proposed approach can be used in critical applications for such a
complex family of velocity models.
Finally, in Fig. 16, we show the degradation of accuracy of the predicted traveltime
fields and the resulting locations as we pollute the observed arrival times by the addition
of random noise with varying ratios. As expected, the situation generally worsens with
the addition of noise, resulting in even higher errors in traveltime fields and locations.
4. Summary and conclusions
In this study, we introduced En-DeepONet, an enhanced variant of deep operator
networks, for near real-time earthquake hypocenter localization. By incorporating in-
formation from seismic arrival times and velocity models, En-DeepONet effectively es-
timated traveltime fields associated with earthquake sources. The addition of the root
network, which included multiplication, addition, and subtraction operators, improved
the accuracy of field relocation in scenarios with moving fields. Through extensive exper-
iments, including various velocity models and arrival times, En-DeepONet demonstrated
remarkable accuracy in earthquake localization, even in complex and heterogeneous envi-
ronments. The framework exhibited excellent generalization capabilities and robustness
against noisy arrival times. The method offers a computationally practicable method to
quantify uncertainty in hypocenter locations due to errors in traveltime picks and veloc-
ity model variations. Moreover, our findings highlight the potential of En-DeepONet to
enhance seismic monitoring systems and contribute to the development of effective early
warning systems for mitigating seismic hazards.
In this article, we focused on a two-dimensional velocity model to illustrate the efficacy
of En-DeepONet compared to the standard DeepONet architecture. Extension of the idea
to three-dimensions is essential for solving problems of practical interests in hypocenter
localization. Given that the standard DeepONet architecture has proven to outperform
other operator networks, like Fourier Neural Operators, in three dimensions, we believe
that our proposed En-DeepONet architecture further improves the representation capa-
bilities of DeepONets without any additional computational cost. Moreover, a refinement
of the proposed approach may be needed in the case when traveltime picks from certain
sensors are unavailable during evaluation of the trained En-DeepONet.
18

--- Sayfa 19 ---
Acknowledgments
We acknowledge the support provided by the College of Petroleum Engineering and
Geosciences (CPG) at King Fahd University of Petroleum & Minerals (KFUPM) through
Competitive Research Grant No. CPG21103.
Data availability
The
data
and
codes
used
in
this
study
will
be
shared
at
https://github.com/ehsanhaghighat/En-DeepONet.
Appendix A. Application to the Laplace equation
To show that the En-DeepONet architecture is not limited to the Eikonal equation,
we consider the Laplace equation in two dimensions subjected to a moving pulse source
term, representing injection/production wells in porous media or a moving heat source
term. The governing PDE is expressed as
∂2u(x)
∂x2
+ ∂2u(x)
∂y2
= −exp

−∥x −xs∥2
δ2

,
x ∈Ω,
(A.1)
subjected to the boundary conditions
u(x) = 0,
x ∈∂Ω,
(A.2)
where, xs is the center of the source location, and δ is the source width. We consider
a square domain Ω= [−1, 1] × [−1, 1], and we consider a fixed source width δ2 = 0.1.
The source center xs is chosen randomly from xs ∼U(−0.9, 0.9)m to build the neural
operator. We only consider unsupervised (physics-informed) in this case, meaning that
the training is only based on the PDE and its boundary condition, without using any
other data.
The input to the branch net is the location of the center of the pulse, i.e., xs, therefore
sensor size is 2 in two dimensions. As per the network details, to provide a fair comparison
between standard DeepONet and En-DeepONet architectures, we keep total trainable
parameters similar for both cases. Accordingly, for the standard DeepONet network, we
use five hyperbolic-tangent layers with 50 neurons width, with an output linear embedding
layer of size 50, for both branch and trunk networks. This choice results in 12,900 trainable
parameters. For the case of the En-DeepONet network, we use two layers with 50 neurons
width for both branch and trunk networks, followed by a two layer root network with 50
and 20 neurons respectively, resulting in 13,900 trainable parameters.
The activation
functions are again hyperbolic-tangent function. The input/output sampling points and
optimization hyper parameters are kept identical for both cases.
The results are shown in Fig. A.17. As can be seen, the standard DeepONet fails to
learn the solution operator for this moving source problem, whereas the En-DeepONet
accurately captures the expected solution, which is an identical trend compared to those
previously reported for the Eikonal equation (see Fig. 4). The loss history Fig. A.18 also
shows a similar trend to those previously reported in Fig. 3.
19

--- Sayfa 20 ---
Figure A.17: Standard DeepONet vs. En-DeepONet for variable source location for the Laplace equation,
with physics-informed (unsupervised) training. Each column plots the temperature field force a randomly
selected source location, with the horizontal and vertical axes as the x, y coordinates.
The plotted
solutions correspond to three different locations for the center of the source pulse, computed using (a)
the reference solution from Finite Element Method (FEM) using COMSOL software, (b) the physics-
informed En-DeepONet, and (c) physics-informed standard DeepONet.
20

--- Sayfa 21 ---
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
epochs
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
100
Normalized loss ( /
0)
DeepONet
En-DeepONet
0
2000
4000
6000
Training time (s)
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
100
DeepONet
En-DeepONet
Figure A.18: Loss function for the standard DeepONet vs. En-DeepONet for moving source location for
the Laplace equation, with physics-informed (unsupervised) training. The vertical axis is the normalized
loss function, and the horizontal axes are training epochs (Left) and training time in seconds (Right).
The training is conducted with a similar number of parameters, the same batch-size and epochs, so that
it provides a fair comparison between the two architectures. Note that En-DeepONet loss can be further
improved as the loss value is still reducing after 10,000 epochs.
References
[1] V. Perlick, Ray optics, Fermat’s principle, and applications to general relativity,
Vol. 61, Springer Science & Business Media, 2000.
[2] R. L. Nowack, Wavefronts and solutions of the eikonal equation, Geophysical Journal
International 110 (1) (1992) 55–62.
[3] E. Rouy, A. Tourin, A viscosity solutions approach to shape-from-shading, SIAM
Journal on Numerical Analysis 29 (3) (1992) 867–884.
[4] G. Wolansky, Eikonal functions: Old and new, A Celebration of Mathematical Mod-
eling: The Joseph B. Keller Anniversary Volume (2013) 181.
[5] C. Satriano, L. Elia, C. Martino, M. Lancieri, A. Zollo, G. Iannaccone, Presto, the
earthquake early warning system for southern italy: Concepts, capabilities and future
perspectives, Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering 31 (2) (2011) 137–153.
[6] L. Lu, P. Jin, G. Pang, Z. Zhang, G. E. Karniadakis, Learning nonlinear operators
via deeponet based on the universal approximation theorem of operators, Nature
Machine Intelligence 3 (3) (2021) 218–229.
[7] Z. Li, N. Kovachki, K. Azizzadenesheli, B. Liu, K. Bhattacharya, A. Stuart,
A. Anandkumar, Fourier neural operator for parametric partial differential equa-
tions, arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08895 (2020).
[8] Z. Li, N. Kovachki, K. Azizzadenesheli, B. Liu, K. Bhattacharya, A. Stuart,
A. Anandkumar, Neural operator: Graph kernel network for partial differential equa-
tions, arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.03485 (2020).
21

--- Sayfa 22 ---
[9] L. Lu, X. Meng, S. Cai, Z. Mao, S. Goswami, Z. Zhang, G. E. Karniadakis, A com-
prehensive and fair comparison of two neural operators (with practical extensions)
based on fair data, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 393
(2022) 114778.
[10] S. Wang, H. Wang, P. Perdikaris, Learning the solution operator of parametric par-
tial differential equations with physics-informed deeponets, Science advances 7 (40)
(2021) eabi8605.
[11] T. Tripura, S. Chakraborty, Wavelet neural operator: a neural operator for paramet-
ric partial differential equations, arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.02191 (2022).
[12] T. Zhang, K. Innanen, D. Trad, Learning the elastic wave equation with fourier
neural operators (2022).
[13] K. Suleymanli, U. Waheed, Microseismic source localization using fourier neural oper-
ators, in: 84th EAGE Annual Conference & Exhibition, no. 1, European Association
of Geoscientists & Engineers, 2023, pp. 1–5.
[14] T. Chen, H. Chen, Universal approximation to nonlinear operators by neural net-
works with arbitrary activation functions and its application to dynamical systems,
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 6 (4) (1995) 911–917.
[15] S. Goswami, M. Yin, Y. Yu, G. E. Karniadakis, A physics-informed variational deep-
onet for predicting crack path in quasi-brittle materials, Computer Methods in Ap-
plied Mechanics and Engineering 391 (2022) 114587.
[16] S. Wang, H. Wang, P. Perdikaris, Improved architectures and training algorithms for
deep operator networks, Journal of Scientific Computing 92 (2) (2022) 1–42.
[17] S. Goswami, A. Bora, Y. Yu, G. E. Karniadakis, Physics-informed neural operators,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05748 (2022).
[18] S. Lanthaler, S. Mishra, G. E. Karniadakis, Error estimates for deeponets: A deep
learning framework in infinite dimensions, Transactions of Mathematics and Its Ap-
plications 6 (1) (2022) tnac001.
[19] B. L¨utjens, C. H. Crawford, C. D. Watson, C. Hill, D. Newman, Multiscale
neural operator: Learning fast and grid-independent pde solvers, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2207.11417 (2022).
[20] N. B. Kovachki, Z. Li, B. Liu, K. Azizzadenesheli, K. Bhattacharya, A. M. Stu-
art, A. Anandkumar, Neural operator: Learning maps between function spaces with
applications to pdes., J. Mach. Learn. Res. 24 (89) (2023) 1–97.
[21] G. Lin, C. Moya, Z. Zhang, Learning the dynamical response of nonlinear non-
autonomous dynamical systems with deep operator neural networks, Engineering
Applications of Artificial Intelligence 125 (2023) 106689.
22

--- Sayfa 23 ---
[22] J. He, S. Koric, S. Kushwaha, J. Park, D. Abueidda, I. Jasiuk, Novel deeponet archi-
tecture to predict stresses in elastoplastic structures with variable complex geometries
and loads, arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03645 (2023).
[23] W. Li, M. Z. Bazant, J. Zhu, Phase-field deeponet: Physics-informed deep operator
neural network for fast simulations of pattern formation governed by gradient flows
of free-energy functionals, arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13368 (2023).
[24] S. Koric, A. Viswantah, D. W. Abueidda, N. A. Sobh, K. Khan, Deep learning
operator network for plastic deformation with variable loads and material properties,
Engineering with Computers (2023) 1–13.
[25] S. Garg, S. Chakraborty, Vb-deeponet: A bayesian operator learning framework
for uncertainty quantification, Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 118
(2023) 105685.
[26] S. Koric, D. W. Abueidda, Data-driven and physics-informed deep learning operators
for solution of heat conduction equation with parametric heat source, International
Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 203 (2023) 123809.
[27] N. Mo¨es, J. Dolbow, T. Belytschko, A finite element method for crack growth without
remeshing, International journal for numerical methods in engineering 46 (1) (1999)
131–150.
[28] G. Karniadakis, S. Sherwin, Spectral/hp element methods for computational fluid
dynamics, Numerical Mathematics and Scie, 2005.
[29] W. Lee, J. C. Lahr, C. Valdes, The hypo71 earthquake location program, Interna-
tional Geophysics 81 (B) (2003) 1641–1642.
[30] M. Sambridge, K. Gallagher, Earthquake hypocenter location using genetic algo-
rithms, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America 83 (5) (1993) 1467–1491.
[31] S. D. Billings, Simulated annealing for earthquake location, Geophysical Journal
International 118 (3) (1994) 680–692.
[32] A. Lomax, J. Virieux, P. Volant, C. Berge-Thierry, Probabilistic earthquake location
in 3d and layered models: Introduction of a metropolis-gibbs method and comparison
with linear locations, Advances in seismic event location (2000) 101–134.
[33] A. Lomax, A. Michelini, A. Curtis, R. Meyers, Earthquake location, direct, global-
search methods, Encyclopedia of complexity and systems science 5 (2009) 2449–2473.
[34] H. Wang, T. Alkhalifah, U. bin Waheed, C. Birnie, Data-driven microseismic event
localization: An application to the oklahoma arkoma basin hydraulic fracturing data,
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 60 (2021) 1–12.
23

--- Sayfa 24 ---
[35] D. Wamriew, R. Pevzner, E. Maltsev, D. Pissarenko, Deep neural networks for de-
tection and location of microseismic events and velocity model inversion from micro-
seismic data acquired by distributed acoustic sensing array, Sensors 21 (19) (2021)
6627.
[36] M. Izzatullah, I. E. Yildirim, U. B. Waheed, T. Alkhalifah, Laplace hypopinn:
physics-informed neural network for hypocenter localization and its predictive un-
certainty, Machine Learning: Science and Technology 3 (4) (2022) 045001.
[37] D. Anikiev, U. b. Waheed, F. Stanˇek, D. Alexandrov, Q. Hao, N. Iqbal, L. Eisner,
Traveltime-based microseismic event location using artificial neural network, Fron-
tiers in Earth Science 10 (2022).
[38] R. Versteeg, The marmousi experience: Velocity model determination on a synthetic
complex data set, The Leading Edge 13 (9) (1994) 927–936.
[39] E. Haghighat, R. Juanes, Sciann: A keras/tensorflow wrapper for scientific computa-
tions and physics-informed deep learning using artificial neural networks, Computer
Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 373 (2021) 113552.
[40] J. A. Sethian, Fast marching methods, SIAM review 41 (2) (1999) 199–235.
[41] C. Deng, S. Feng, H. Wang, X. Zhang, P. Jin, Y. Feng, Q. Zeng, Y. Chen, Y. Lin,
Openfwi: Large-scale multi-structural benchmark datasets for seismic full waveform
inversion, arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02926 (2021).
24
