
--- Sayfa 1 ---
1 
 
Deep Learning in Earthquake Engineering: A Comprehensive Review 
 
 
Yazhou Xie*
Department of Civil Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A0C3, Canada 
 
 
 
Abstract 
This article surveys the growing interest in utilizing Deep Learning (DL) as a powerful tool to address 
challenging problems in earthquake engineering. Despite decades of advancement in domain knowledge, 
issues such as uncertainty in earthquake occurrence, unpredictable seismic loads, nonlinear structural 
responses, and community engagement remain difficult to tackle using domain-specific methods. DL offers 
promising solutions by leveraging its data-driven capacity for nonlinear mapping, sequential data modeling, 
automatic feature extraction, dimensionality reduction, optimal decision-making, etc. However, the 
literature lacks a comprehensive review that systematically covers a consistent scope intersecting DL and 
earthquake engineering. To bridge the gap, the article first discusses methodological advances to elucidate 
various applicable DL techniques, such as multi-layer perceptron (MLP), convolutional neural network 
(CNN), recurrent neural network (RNN), generative adversarial network (GAN), autoencoder (AE), 
transfer learning (TL), reinforcement learning (RL), and graph neural network (GNN). A thorough research 
landscape is then disclosed by exploring various DL applications across different research topics, including 
vision-based seismic damage assessment and structural characterization, seismic demand and damage state 
prediction, seismic response history prediction, regional seismic risk assessment and community resilience, 
ground motion (GM) for engineering use, seismic response control, and the inverse problem of 
system/damage identification. Suitable DL techniques for each research topic are identified, emphasizing 
the preeminence of CNN for vision-based tasks, RNN for sequential data, RL for community resilience, 
and unsupervised learning for GM analysis. The article also discusses opportunities and challenges for 
leveraging DL in earthquake engineering research and practice, highlighting the need for open-access 
multimodal big data and efforts to enhance model interpretability and incorporate physics information into 
DL. Finally, the paper advocates for DL applications to further advance the research frontier of uncertainty 
quantification in performance-based earthquake engineering. 
 
Keywords: Deep learning, earthquake engineering, seismic damage, response prediction, seismic risk, 
community resilience.  
 
1. Introduction 
While the history of Deep learning (DL) could be traced back several decades in the 1940s with the 
early development of artificial neural networks (ANN), its renaissance only emerged in the 2010s because 
of three factors: the availability of large-scale datasets, the significantly increased computing power, and 
the evolution of algorithmic techniques in network architecture and training scheme. DL’s exceptional 
performance stems from its ability to derive meaningful, high-level features from raw sensory data. This 
capability is honed through statistical training and learning against large datasets, enabling the creation of 
 
* Email: tim.xie@mcgill.ca 
 
Preprint submitted to arXiv (May 14, 2024) 

--- Sayfa 2 ---
2 
 
an efficient representation of the input space. To date, DL has seen remarkable advancements across various 
domains, revolutionizing fields such as natural language processing [1], computer vision [2–4], speech 
recognition [5], medical science [6], game play [7], robotics [8], autonomous vehicles [9], among others.  
In recent years, earthquake-related fields have also seen a surge of interest in DL applications, which 
motivated the research community to conduct several relevant state-of-the-art reviews. For instance, Xie et 
al. (2020) [10] reviewed the promise of implementing machine learning (ML) techniques (e.g., artificial 
neural network, support vector machine, decision tree, random forest) in four topic areas of earthquake 
engineering, including seismic hazard analysis, system identification and damage detection, seismic 
fragility assessment, and structural control for earthquake mitigation. Zhang et al. (2021) [11] presented 
four DL algorithms, including feedforward neural network (FNN), recurrent neural network (RNN), 
convolutional neural network (CNN), and generative adversarial network (GAN), and their applications in 
geotechnical engineering. Avci et al. (2021) [12] focused on vibration-based damage detection in civil 
structures where autoencoder (AE) and CNN have been pinpointed with predominant implementations. As 
a data-rich subfield in geoscience, seismology has also benefited from the advancement of DL techniques, 
which pushed the forefront of research on various seismological tasks [13]. Other related review articles 
surveyed (1) DL-based computer vision technology in structural damage detection [14], (2) six commonly 
used DL models in earthquake disaster assessment [15], and (3) the utilization of GAN for the generation 
of synthetic seismic signals and its applications in seismic-related geophysical studies [16]. Most recently, 
Cha et al. (2024) [17] also provided a comprehensive review of DL applications in structural health 
monitoring.  
  None of the aforementioned review articles covers a consistent research landscape that intersects DL 
and earthquake engineering. The mismatch lies in either the methods surveyed (e.g., Xie et al. [10] focused 
on ML techniques; Marano et al. [16] only surveyed GAN) or the field of interest, namely the fields of, e.g., 
geotechnical engineering [11], seismology [13], and structural health monitoring [17] have overlapping yet 
distinct DL applications compared to earthquake engineering. In particular, earthquake engineering is an 
interdisciplinary engineering branch that describes earthquake hazards at the source, characterizes site 
effects and structural responses, evaluates and mitigates seismic vulnerability and risk, as well as develops 
seismic codes and standards. The multiple disciplines involved in earthquake engineering motivate the 
current study to search and select nearly 200 DL-based journal publications from prominent academic 
databases, such as Web of Science, Engineering Village, and Wiley Online Library. As shown in Figure 1, 
the overall body of knowledge from these selected journal articles indicates a rapidly increasing research 
frontier of exploring DL as an innovative tool to deal with various challenging research problems in 
earthquake engineering. The associated rich body of knowledge warrants a separate, in-depth survey that 
is currently missing in the literature.  
 
 
Figure 1. The growing interest in DL applications in earthquake engineering 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Number of Papers
Year
Topic No.
1   2   3   4  5   6  7

--- Sayfa 3 ---
3 
 
 
DL applications in earthquake engineering can be grouped into different topic areas depending on the 
types of data as the inputs and research tasks as the outputs. As illustrated in Figure 2, the main body of the 
literature can be categorized into seven distinguishable research topics, including (1) vision-based seismic 
damage assessment and structural characterization, (2) seismic demand and damage state prediction, (3) 
seismic response history prediction, (4) regional seismic risk assessment and community resilience, (5) 
ground motion for engineering use, (6) seismic response control, and (7) the inverse problem of 
system/damage identification under seismic loads. Each research topic has triggered a different number of 
studies (Figure 1) that applied a variety of DL techniques (Figure 2). It should be noted that these seven 
research topics do not encompass a handful of extra relevant studies that deal with image data augmentation 
[18], seismic damage classification through textual description [19], design of structural components [20] 
and base isolators [21], etc.  
Given the overall portrayal of the knowledge structure shown in Figure 2, the current study conducts a 
comprehensive literature survey of DL applications in earthquake engineering by (1) introducing and 
discussing the methodological advances for each identified DL technique and (2) disclosing a detailed 
picture of DL applications in each research topic. The survey is then completed with an in-depth discussion 
about the specific aspects of earthquake engineering that avail interesting opportunities, as well as pose 
additional challenges, for DL.   
 
 
Figure 2. DL to deal with different research topics in earthquake engineering (two images adapted from [22,23]) 
 
2. Deep Learning Techniques Applied in Earthquake Engineering 
A variety of DL techniques have been applied to deal with challenging problems in earthquake 
engineering. Based on whether the training data is labeled, DL techniques can be broadly divided into 
supervised learning, unsupervised learning, hybrid learning that combines both, and other relevant 
techniques. As shown in Figure 3, the literature review identifies several DL techniques under each category 
that have seen a wide spectrum of applications. This section briefly discusses the methodological advances 
associated with each DL technique, as well as its applications to deal with different research topics 
mentioned above.    
Source: Vecteezy.com
  
  
  
  
  
  
         
         
Field 
Measurement
Numerical 
modeling
Actuator
Specimen
Experimental
testing
Large-Volume Seismic Data
Earthquake Engineering Applications
Vision-based seismic damage assessment                        
& structural characterization
Seismic demand and damage state prediction
Seismic response history prediction
Regional seismic risk assessment and 
community resilience
Ground motion for engineering use
Seismic response control
Inverse problem – system/damage identification
-8
-4
0
4
8
0
4
8
12
16
Third Floor Relative 
Disp. (cm)
Time (s)
Uncontrolled
Controlled
Deep Learning
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
DNN
CNN 
LSTM
GRU
GAN
AE
TL
RL
GNN

--- Sayfa 4 ---
4 
 
 
Figure 3. Widely applied deep learning techniques in earthquake engineering 
2.1. Deep neural network - multi-layer perceptron 
Some studies use the general terminology deep neural networks (DNN) to refer to all DL algorithms 
that utilize more than three layers of neural networks. For the purpose of differentiating it from other 
techniques mentioned below, DNN in this study instead refers to its foundation architecture of multi-layer 
perceptron (MLP), a supervised learning technique with feedforward networks composed solely of fully 
connected (FC) layers. As shown in Figure 4, the MLP in DL consists of a number of units (neurons) that 
are connected by weighted links and organized through an input layer, multiple hidden layers, and an output 
layer. An example of the computation at the kth layer can be written as 
 
𝑎𝑗
[𝑘] 𝑓(∑𝑊𝑖𝑗
𝑛
𝑖=1
 𝑎𝑖
[𝑘−1] + 𝑏) 
(1) 
where Wij, 𝑎𝑖
[𝑘−1], and 𝑎𝑗
[𝑘] are the weights, input activations, and output activations, respectively, b is the 
bias term, and f (·) is the nonlinear activation function that triggers a neuron to generate an output only if 
the inputs cross a threshold. Various forms of commonly used nonlinear activation functions are also 
presented in Figure 4. The feedforward networks of MLP ensure that all the computation is performed as a 
sequence of operations on the outputs of a previous layer, whereas as shown in Equation (1), the FC layers 
consider that all output activations are composed of a weighted sum of all input activations. The MLP aims 
to tune the weights in the network such that the network performs a desired mapping of input-to-output 
activations. The difference between the ideal and current mapping is referred to as the loss (L). When 
training the MLP, the weights are usually updated using an optimization process termed gradient descent. 
An efficient way to compute the partial derivatives of the gradient is through backpropagation, which 
passes values backward through the network to compute how the loss is affected by each weight.  
 
 
Figure 4. Multi-layer perceptron and various forms of nonlinear activation functions 
DL
Supervised
DNN
CNN
RNN
LSTM
GRU
Unsupervised
GAN
AE
VAE
Hybrid/Other
TL
RL
GNN
Input Layer
Hidden Layers
Output Layer
X
Ŷ
Feed Forward
Fully-Connected
a[1]
1
a[1]
2
a[1]
3
a[1]
n
a[2]
1
a[2]
2
a[2]
3
a[2]
n
a[3]
1
a[3]
2
a[3]
3
a[3]
n
a[4]
Sigmoid
y = 1 / (1+e-x)
Hyperbolic Tangent
y = (ex - e-x) / (ex  + e-x)
Rectified Linear Unit 
(ReLU)
y = max (0, x)
Leaky ReLU
y = max (αx, x), α = 0.1
Exponential LU
y =
x,              x≥0
α (ex - 1), x<0
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
-5
0
5
-1
0
1
-5
0
5
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
0
1

--- Sayfa 5 ---
5 
 
 
 
MLP has been applied to address several regression and classification tasks in topic areas such as seismic 
demand and damage state prediction, regional seismic risk assessment and community resilience, and 
ground motion for engineering use. While MLP has been found suitable to deal with tabular datasets 
consisting of scaler inputs, its applicability is somewhat challenged by other more advanced techniques 
(e.g., CNN and RNN) when dealing with complex tasks that involve other forms of big data, such as image 
or 2D data, and sequential data.   
 
2.2. Convolutional neural network 
As an extension of MLP, few modifications have been made in the CNN model architecture, which 
resulted in a significant breakthrough of CNN in big data applications, particularly in dealing with image 
data inputs with high accuracy and efficiency (e.g., the ImageNet Challenge [2]). The modifications include 
the integration of 2D convolution layers, the addition of the pooling layer, and the associated sparse 
connectivity versus all FC layers to reduce the required amount of storage and computation. Figure 5 shows 
a typical 2D CNN that is composed of multiple convolutional and pooling layers, each generating a 
successively higher level abstraction of the input data, termed a feature map that preserves essential yet 
unique information. As shown in Figure 5, a convolution performs dot product operations between the input 
and a kernel (i.e., namely filter or receptive field) and sums up the resulting products, where the 
hyperparameter stride determines how the kernel slides over the input array in both width and height 
directions. Furthermore, a pooling operation is applied to further reduce the dimensions of the input feature 
map, enabling the network to be robust and invariant to small shifts and distortions. In particular, pooling 
combines a set of values in its receptive field into a smaller number of values through operations such as 
max, average, and min pooling (Figure 5).         
 
 
Figure 5. A typical 2D Convolutional Neural Network, its convolution operation, and two forms of pooling  
 
 
CNN bears the capability to automatically extract essential features from the input without the need for 
human intervention. To date, the computer science community has developed various variants of CNN, 
including VGGNet [24], MVSNet [25], AlexNet [26], RefineNet [27], RCNN [3], Faster R-CNN [28], 
Mask R-CNN [29], YOLO [30], U-Net [31], ResNet [32], among others. CNN and its variants have seen 
predominant applications in vision-based seismic damage assessment and structural characterization. 
Besides, both 1D and 2D CNN have been implemented in dealing with scaler, sequential, and image data 
Input
Kernel
Feature Maps
Convolution
Pooling
Convolution
Pooling
Flatten 
Layer
Fully Connected Layer
Output
1 0 2 3
5 6 7 8
3 2 1 0
1 2 3 4
6 8
3 4
2x2 kernel; stride of 2
Max Pooling
Avg. Pooling
3 5
2 2
Pooling
1 0 2 3
5 6 7 8
3 2 1 0
2 1 3 1
3
8
0
3
3
8
0
6
1 2 8 6 1 1
0 3 0 2 2 4
0 0 0
0 0 0
1 0 1
Convolution
Kernel
Input
4 2 1 0
5 2 6 7
9 8 9 7
0 5 2 6
Output
Typical CNN

--- Sayfa 6 ---
6 
 
in research topics such as seismic demand and damage state prediction, seismic response history prediction, 
and the inverse problem of system/damage identification.  
2.3. Recurrent neural network 
RNN is a powerful model for processing sequential data. Figure 6(a) illustrates the computational graph 
of a representative RNN model; its network architecture is designed to produce an output at each time step 
with recurrent connections between hidden units. The recurrent formulation is accompanied by the sharing 
of parameters (e.g., shared weight matrices U, V, and W in Figure 6(a)), which ensures that each element 
of the output is produced using the same update rule applied to previous outputs. The parameter sharing 
also enables generalization in model learning through a few training samples. The RNN is typically trained 
by the backpropagation through time algorithm, which obtains the gradients first on the internal nodes and 
then on the parameter nodes. In addition to the RNN model shown in Figure 6(a), other important design 
patterns for recurrent connections include (1) using the output at the previous step and (2) reading an entire 
sequence to produce a single output [33].      
Standard RNN has the issue of vanishing gradients, which makes learning long data sequences 
challenging. One successful technique for addressing vanishing gradients came in the form of the long 
short-term memory (LSTM) model developed by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber (1997) [34]. As shown in 
Figure 6(b), LSTM resembles standard RNN but with each ordinary recurrent node replaced by a memory 
cell, which is equipped with an internal state and three types of multiplicative gates. The forget gate deletes 
information that is no longer needed; the input gate selects information to add to the cell state; and the 
output gate decides what information is required for the current hidden state. The values of these three gates 
are computed through fully connected layers with sigmoid activation functions, ensuring a scaled value 
range of (0, 1). The input and output gates prevent irrelevant information from entering or leaving the cells, 
whereas the forget gates enable unbiased and continuous predictions, as they can make cells completely 
forget their previous states. As such, the vanishing gradient problem encountered by standard RNN is solved 
through the memory cell by introducing a constant error flow, which enables LSTM to more effectively 
tackle long data sequence problems.  
A streamlined version of LSTM is the gated recurrent unit (GRU) [35], which is also designed to model 
sequential data by allowing information to be selectively remembered or forgotten over time. GRU is 
designed with fewer parameters, making it easier and more efficient to train the RNN model. As shown in 
Figure 6(c), GRU directly uses the hidden state to transfer information through two gates, namely a reset 
gate and an update gate. The reset gate decides how much past information to forget (i.e., for short-term 
dependency), whereas the update gate allows long-term control of the data flow in time steps. The simpler 
gating mechanism of GRU makes it a better candidate for increasing the speed performance of RNN models.  
RNN and its variants of LSTM and GRU have been applied to deal with research problems that involve 
sequential data, where the corresponding research topics include seismic response history prediction, 
ground motion for engineering use, and seismic response control.  
 
 
 

--- Sayfa 7 ---
7 
 
 
 
(a) The computational graph computes the training loss 
of a recurrent network that maps an input sequence of x 
values to a corresponding sequence of output o values. 
A loss L measures how far each o is from the 
corresponding training target y. The RNN has input to 
hidden connections parametrized by a weight matrix U, 
hidden-to-hidden recurrent connections parametrized by 
a weight matrix W, and hidden-to-output connections 
parametrized by a weight matrix V [33] 
 
(b) LSTM cell and its operations 
 
(c) GRU cell and its gates 
Figure 6. A representative example of RNN and its two variants of LSTM and GRU 
 
2.4. Generative adversarial network 
As initially proposed for unsupervised learning, the generative adversarial network (GAN) was first 
developed by Goodfellow et al. (2014) [36] as a generative model that consists of two interlinked neural 
networks. As shown in Figure 7, G is the generator that takes random noise in the latent space as input to 
produce fake samples that are close to real samples. On the contrary, D is the discriminator whose role is 
to differentiate between real and fake samples. GAN is trained in an adversarial manner as a supervised 
learning problem where the generator and discriminator are involved in a minimax two-player game. In 
particular, GAN is trained for the generator to produce convincing fake data until the discriminator is 
deceived approximately 50% of the time.  
GAN has seen a handful of applications in earthquake engineering to deal with different research topics. 
As discussed below, these research topics include (1) vision-based seismic damage assessment when 
subjected to low data and imbalanced class [37], (2) seismic response history prediction for buildings under 
undamaged and damaged conditions [38], (3) regional seismic risk assessment for generating seismic 
hazard and damage maps [39], and (4) the generation of artificial ground motions for engineering use [40].  
 
 
Figure 7. Architecture of GAN 
y
L
o
h
x
W
U
V
Unfold
y(t-1)
L(t-1)
o(t-1)
h(t-1)
x(t-1)
W
U
V
y(t)
L(t)
o(t)
h(t)
x(t)
W
U
V
y(t+1)
L(t+1)
o(t+1)
h(t+1)
x(t+1)
W
U
V
h(…)
h(…)
W
+
Memory cell
internal state
C(t-1)
C(t)
σ
Forget 
gate
F(t)
Hidden state
h(t-1)
σ
Input 
gate
I(t)
tanh
Input 
node
Ĉ(t)
σ
Output 
gate
O(t)
Input X(t)
tanh
h(t)
σ
FC layer activation 
function
Elementwise 
operator
Copy
Concatenate
h(t-1)
h(t)
Input X(t)
+
tanh
σ
1-
σ
Reset gate
Update gate
Hidden state
Low 
dimensional 
latent space
Generative 
network G
High 
dimensional 
sample space
Real samples
Generated 
fake samples
Discriminative 
network D
Real
Fake
Fine tuning

--- Sayfa 8 ---
8 
 
 
2.5. Autoencoder  
Autoencoder (AE) is another type of generative model used in unsupervised learning [33]. It is based on 
the idea of finding representation of latent information through two main components: the encoder and the 
decoder. As shown in Figure 8(a), the encoder converts the data input into a low-dimensional embedding 
for a latent representation, whereas the decoder is designed to decompress the low-dimensional embedding 
and reconstruct the input data. The encoder-decoder architecture essentially learns to compress the data 
while minimizing the reconstruction error.  
Variational autoencoder (VAE) [41] extends the traditional AE architecture by introducing a 
probabilistic framework for generating the compressed representation of the input data. In particular, 
traditional AE embeds the input into a vector representation, whereas VAE embeds the input into a pre-
defined distribution in the latent space (Figure 8(b)). The latent space in VAE is regularized through KL 
divergence to have latent variables follow independent standard Gaussian distributions. The regularizer 
adopted in VAE avoids overfitting and makes latent variables continuous, interpretable, and sometimes 
linked to certain features of the original data. 
The capability of low-dimensional embedding of the original data makes AE and VAE a promising tool 
to be used in seismic damage detection (e.g., [42]) and ground motion classification and generation (e.g., 
[43]).  
 
 
 
(a) autoencoder 
(b) variational autoencoder 
Figure 8. Architecture of (a) autoencoder and (b) variational autoencoder 
2.6. Transfer learning 
Transfer learning (TL) is a technique that utilizes a DL model previously trained for a given task (source 
domain) as the base model for refinement against a new task (target domain), where less data is required 
for the new training. The source and target domains typically share a similar learning task. TL helps quickly 
tune the parameters for the new task and improves the model performance in generalization, accuracy, and 
time efficiency. Different TL settings can be defined based on the type of task and the nature of the data 
available in the source and target domains. In general, TL approaches can be categorized into instance-
transfer, feature-representation-transfer, parameter-transfer, and relational-knowledge-transfer [44]. TL has 
been combined with CNN to deal with several research tasks in vision-based seismic damage assessment 
(e.g., [45,46]).   
 
2.7. Reinforcement learning 
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a sub-area of machine learning that deals with sequential decision-
making [47]. It devises a framework where a computer agent learns to perform a task through repeated trail 
and error interactions within a dynamic environment. The standard theory of RL is defined by a Markov 
Decision Process where (1) the agent chooses an action according to the policy at the current state and (2) 
the environment receives that action, produces a reward, and transfers to the next state. The objective of 
Encoder
Input
Embedding
Decoder
Output
Reconstruction Loss
Input
Latent Space
Output
Reconstruction Loss + KL Divergence
Encoder
Decoder

--- Sayfa 9 ---
9 
 
RL is to find the optimal policy for the agent to maximize the expected cumulative reward over the future 
(also termed the value of the state). RL involves managing a significant number of state-action pairs for a 
track of value (reward) attached to each action, making it challenging to deal with real-world scenarios that 
involve all different possibilities. In this regard, deep RL can be applied to combine RL with a deep artificial 
neural network, which is trained to predict the values or evaluate the policies against all possible actions 
under a given state. Deep RL can be model-based or model-free: the former learns a model to predict the 
reaction of the environment under a given action, yet the latter directly learns the value and/or the policy 
from experience (data). Widely used model-free deep RL algorithms include (1) value-based methods (e.g., 
Deep Q-learning [48]) that update the value function to learn a suitable policy, (2) policy-based methods 
that learn the policy directly [49], and (3) the actor-critic algorithm that computes the policy gradient using 
a value-based critic function [50].  
In earthquake engineering, deep RL has been primarily implemented in community resilience studies to 
generate optimal reconstruction plans (e.g., [51]) or select optimal repair decisions (e.g., [52]), which helped 
communities prioritize improvements to enhance and maximize seismic resilience.  
 
2.8. Graph neural network 
Graph neural networks (GNN) are specifically designed neural architectures operated on graph-structure 
data, which consists of a collection of entities (nodes) with their relationships (edges) represented by a 
graph. GNN aims to iteratively update the node representations by aggregating the representations of node 
neighbors and their own representations in the previous iteration. Figure 9(a) illustrates a general design 
framework for a GNN model [53]. A graph structure needs to be first defined as the model input. The 
original data can have an explicit (e.g., transportation network) or implicit (e.g., image) graph structure with 
directed/undirected edges, homogeneous/heterogeneous nodes and edges, and static/dynamic features. A 
GNN model can then be constructed against a loss function that depends on the training setting (e.g., 
supervised, unsupervised, or semi-supervised) and the learning tasks at node, edge, or graph level, as 
illustrated in Figure 9(b). A GNN layer might be designed to have different computational modules, such 
as propagation, skipping, sampling, and pooling [53]. GNN variants, such as graph convolutional networks, 
graph attention networks, and graph recurrent networks, have demonstrated ground-breaking performance 
on many DL tasks that involve graph structures with complex inter-node relationships and interdependency 
[54].  
In earthquake engineering, the field of regional seismic risk assessment and community resilience has 
seen a couple of GNN applications. One application is for modeling the topology and interdependency of 
complex infrastructure networks [183], and the other is combined with RL to select optimal repair decisions 
for water distribution networks [52]. 
  
 
 
(a) general design framework 
(b) graph learning tasks 
Figure 9. (a) The general design framework and (b) graph learning tasks for GNN  
 
Input
……
GNN Layers
……
……
Output
Loss Function (Training Setting, Task Setting)
?
?
?
Node
classification
regression 
clustering
Edge
classification
link prediction
?
Graph
classification
embedding
generation
?

--- Sayfa 10 ---
10 
 
3. Deep Learning Applications in Earthquake Engineering 
3.1. Vision-based seismic damage assessment and structural characterization 
Vision-based seismic damage assessment 
Many studies are motivated by the need for rapid and automated seismic damage assessment across a 
large region for equipping first responders, decision makers, and stake-holders with an important source of 
information to enable timely post-earthquake response, loss evaluation, and retrofit planning. The state of 
research on vision-based seismic damage assessment can be generally classified into two categories. The 
first is to deal with remote sensing imagery (i.e., satellite, aerial, and, particularly, UAV imagery) to achieve 
regionwide detection of damaged or collapsed buildings in the wake of an earthquake event (e.g., [45,55], 
Figure 10(a)). Studies in the second category have focused on handling ground photographs obtained 
through (1) field surveys during earthquake reconnaissance practice and (2) lab testing of different 
structural components to accomplish high-resolution seismic damage classification in physical states (e.g., 
concrete cracking and spalling, rebar exposure, buckling, and fracture) and damage levels (e.g., slight, 
moderate, extensive, complete) [56–58] (Figure 10(b) and (c)). Other than these two tasks, a handful of 
studies have also considered leveraging image data to distinguish damage caused by corrosion versus 
earthquake [46], predict stiffness and strength degradation [59], identify beam deflection [60], and detect 
earthquake-induced secondary hazards, such as landslide [61] and ground failure [62]. 
 
 
satellite 
 
airborne 
 
UAV 
(a) building damage detection using remote sensing imagery (blue – detected damage, violet – false positive, 
yellow – false negative) (adapted from [63]) 
 
 
(b) damage level classification for earthquake 
reconnaissance (Damage 1 – surface crack, Damage 2 – 
spalling, Damage 3 – spalling with exposed rebars, and 
Damage 4 – severely buckled rebars) (adapted from 
[58]) 
(c) damage assessment for experimentally tested 
columns (Damage Sate 2 – left two, Damage State 4 – 
3rd and 4th, Damage Sate 5 – last one) (adapted from 
[56]) 
Figure 10. Example studies on vision-based seismic damage assessment 
CNN has been considered in many studies as the most effective DL tool to automatically extract strong 
deep features for image classification and semantic segmentation, where widely-applied CNN-based 
models include ResNet [64], U-Net [65], YOLO [66], Faster R-CNN [62], Mask R-CNN [67], RefineNet 
[68], among others (Figure 11). CNN has also been combined with TL (e.g., [45,46,63,69]) to improve 
model transferability and generalization against different datasets. The model performance of these DL 
frameworks is commonly evaluated through confusion matrix (accuracy, recall, precision) and its derived 
metrics such as overall accuracy (OA), kappa coefficient, F1 score for damage detection and classification, 
as well as the intersection over union (IoU) that quantifies the degree of overlap between two image boxes 
for damage segmentation (Figure 11).  

--- Sayfa 11 ---
11 
 
A detailed review identifies several representative studies in the literature. The methodological 
advancement from these studies include (1) the combination of aerial images and 3D point cloud features 
to improve CNN model accuracy [103]; (2) the use of a RNN as a probabilistic anomaly detector on the 
temporal changes of synthetic aperture radar (SAR) to estimate earthquake damage [100]; (3) the 
application of TL to achieve structural component characterization, damage level classification, and 
damage type determination [77]; (4) a convolutional AE model with flexible configurations for pixel-level 
recognition of damaged buildings under diverse weather conditions [106]; (5) a novel loss function fusing 
geometric consistency constraint with cross-entropy loss in a U-Net framework for post-earthquake 
building segmentation with complex geometric features across multiple scales [65]; (6) a three-level CNN 
approach with Bayesian optimization for hyperparameter selection for bridge system-level failure 
classification, column detection, and damage localization [85]; (7) an integration of the DeepLab 
framework with the linear iterative cluster method and mathematical morphological approach to obtain 
clearer boundaries for damaged building areas [99]; (8) a multimodal and multitemporal optical/SAR 
dataset for building damage mapping under earthquakes, tsunamis, and typhoons [70]; (9) a novel quantum 
CNN approach to detect multiclass seismic damage of RC buildings from images [73]; (10) the balanced 
semi-supervised GAN to resolve the low-data and imbalanced-class issue [37]; (11) a combination of 3D 
point cloud and 2D image for 3D damage quantification [83]; and (12) a multi-task learning approach that 
simultaneously accomplishes the semantic segmentation of seven-type structural components, three-type 
seismic damage, and four-type deterioration states [57]. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Hierarchical distribution of studies for vision-
based seismic damage assessment [37,45,46,55–116] 
according to data source, DL approach, task topic, and 
evaluation metric 
Figure 12. Soft-story building classification from 
street view images for Buckman in Portland, 
Oregon, United States (adapted from [23]) 
Vision-based structural characterization 
Other than rapidly assessing structural damage after earthquake events, a dozen studies have made 
attempts to handle cite-scale satellite and street view images for characterizing structural systems to support 
the simulation of earthquake impacts and decision-making, as well as detecting potential structural defects 
that are vulnerable to earthquake loading [117]. The DL involved is to deal with image-based structural 
system classification or pixel-level semantic segmentation that extracts certain structural components; all 

--- Sayfa 12 ---
12 
 
studies have shown the promise of utilizing CNN and its variants, such as Mask R-CNN [118], VGG [119], 
SegNet [120], to achieve good model performance, which has been commonly evaluated through confusion 
matrix and F1 score. Street view images are the primary type of image data well suited for DL to identify 
soft-story buildings [23,121,122] (Figure 12), lateral-load resistant systems in material and type [123,124], 
masonry buildings [118,119], and bridge components (e.g., columns, beams, and slabs) [120] and 
substructure types (frame bent, wall, hammerhead wall) [125]. Satellite images have also been utilized to 
classify the shapes of building roofs [117]. A somewhat unique attempt is to classify soils into different site 
classes using images designed as a combination of the topographic slope and the mean horizontal-to-vertical 
spectral ratio (HVSR) of earthquake recordings [126]. Instead of dealing with street view images of building 
facades, which might be blocked in raw images, Chen et al. [127] segmented 3D point-cloud data in a city, 
extracted point density features for buildings, and identified soft-story buildings using CNN models.  
3.2. Seismic demand and damage state prediction 
The studies compiled in this section focus on dealing with the significant computational challenge in 
conducting nonlinear response history analyses (NRHA) of complex structural systems. DL models are 
trained as surrogate models to predict the peak values from these analyses as seismic demands (e.g., 
[128,129]), which are further utilized for damage state classification (e.g., [130,131]) and seismic fragility 
assessment (e.g., [132,133]). As mainly targeting classes of structures for regional assessment, the devised 
DL algorithms handle data inputs (i.e., those with varying values) from both GMs and structural attributes. 
Figure 13 presents a chord diagram that summarizes the developed DL models with their applications to 
address various types of data inputs. For GMs, viable input data formats include (1) the original time-series 
signal handled by 1D CNN [128,134] and LSTM [135–137]; (2) feature parameters related to earthquake 
(e.g., magnitude, epicenter distance) and intensity (e.g., peak ground acceleration, response spectra 
acceleration) as scaler inputs for CNN [138,139], DNN [133,140,141], and Bayesian DL [142]; (3) the 
spectrogram image processed through Duhamel integral [143], short-time Fourier transform (STFT), and 
wavelet transform [130,131] to train the 2D CNN while accounting for temporal/spectral non-stationarity 
of GM; and (4) the spectrum curve in the frequency domain (e.g., pseudo-acceleration spectrum [144] and 
Fourier spectrum [145]) to train CNN and DNN models (Figure 13). Other than GMs, structural attributes 
have been converted into data inputs in two ways. The first is to deal with one specific class of structures 
where its peak responses are considered to be affected by influential feature parameters such as story 
number [136], natural period [146], material property [147], etc. In contrast, the second approach considers 
using cyclic hysteresis loops or monotonic force-displacement curves from pushover analyses 
[129,142,148,149] to more sophisticatedly represent structural behaviors and train DL models.  
As is typically phrased to replace NRHA, seismic demands and damage states as data outputs for 
labeling and supervised learning have been obtained through numerical simulations. The performance of 
DL models is evaluated through either the confusion matrix for damage state classification or regression 
metrics, e.g., mean absolute error (MAE), mean square error (MSE), and R2, for seismic demand prediction.    
A detailed review also identifies several unique and representative studies in the literature. The 
methodological advancement from these studies includes (1) the stacked LSTM with specific network 
architectures for improved accuracy and reduced training time [136]; (2) an AE model for seismic response 
reconstruction where reconstruction errors are used to detect seismic damage [42]; (3) the use of floor 
acceleration response history as data inputs to estimate inter-story drift and remaining stiffness ratio [150]; 
(4) the Bayesian DL with a loss function proportional to the negative log likelihood of the Gaussian 
distribution function to obtain the mean and variance of structural responses [142]; (5) the utilization of 
flexibility matrix to represent the target structure where the difference between the two matrices is used to 
identify seismic damage in near-real-time [151]; (6) the DNN prediction of modal contribution coefficients 
to improve the accuracy of the response spectrum method [152]; and (7) the training of DNN to predict 
high-fidelity results from low-fidelity simulations [132].   

--- Sayfa 13 ---
13 
 
      
 
 
Figure 13. DL models to handle different types of 
data inputs for seismic demand and damage state 
prediction (Nomenclature: GM – ground motion, Par. – 
parameter, Spec. – spectrum, Stru. – structural, Hys. – 
hysteresis) [42,128–159] 
 
Figure 14. DL approach to handle different data 
inputs from three data sources for seismic response 
history prediction [38,160–200] 
 
3.3. Seismic response history prediction 
A more rigorous attempt to leverage DL as a surrogate model is to predict the entire time history of 
structural responses during earthquake events. Figure 14 summarizes the state of research for seismic 
response predictions in terms of the utilized DL models, their compatible data inputs, and the ways to 
generate/obtain such data inputs and outputs. Most studies handle model inputs as sequential regression 
problems to predict time-series response histories of different structural parameters, including inter-story 
drift, floor acceleration, restoring force, etc., which are primarily generated through numerical simulations 
(Figure 14). Although CNN is recognized for its capability in the classification of data with grid-like 
topology (e.g., 2D images), 1D CNN has been applied to deal with GM inputs and structural response 
outputs with time-sequence structures for extracting the deep features and describing the input-output 
relationships (e.g., [174,180]). In contrast, as designed to learn sequential, time-varying, linear/nonlinear 
patterns for regression problems, RNN (e.g., [197]), with specific model architecture such as GRU (e.g., 
[172]) and LSTM (e.g., [160]), have shown the promise on seismic response modeling. In particular, LSTM 
is favored in the literature with the highest number of applications (Figure 14) due to its added ability to 
capture long-range data dependencies for predicting time-series responses. 
Many studies are motivated to achieve a complete replacement of finite element modeling that predicts 
seismic response histories using GMs as model inputs. Methodological advancements identified in the 
relevant literature include (1) directly integrating DL into the time-stepping numerical integration schemes 
to solve nonlinear dynamics [170,179,187]; (2) embedding physics constraints in the loss functions for 
physics-informed DL with enhanced model performance [173,178,189,190]; (3) introducing the attention 
mechanism that selects dominant features for a higher prediction accuracy [175,177]; (4) addressing 
structural portfolios where structural attributes are also included as feature parameters to train DL models 
[162,163,169,175]; and (5) comparing the model performance of LSTM, WaveNet, and 2D CNN in 
accuracy, efficiency, and robustness [200].  
The other research area deals with seismic structural health monitoring (SHM) that utilizes existing 
structural responses (e.g., those obtained from shaking table tests and field measurements) as data inputs to 

--- Sayfa 14 ---
14 
 
predict other response quantities of interest, forecast future responses, and pinpoint real-time damage 
conditions. For instance, Park et al. [196] trained CNNs to estimate strain responses of structural members 
from measured accelerations and displacements to support long-term monitoring in case of the absence or 
defect of strain sensors. Pan et al. [165] addressed the limited sensor problem to predict bridge displacement 
responses at unmeasured locations from those at measured locations. In a similar context, unsupervised DL 
models with encoder-decoder networks have been developed to (1) provide seismic damage index with a 
measure of uncertainty at each time instant [168], (2) forecast upcoming responses through historical 
measurements [199], and (3) reconstruct structural responses in a healthy state and identify the seismic 
damage based on the difference between input and reconstructed data [171]. Likewise, transient dynamic 
response and damage classification were achieved by developing a GAN to predict building responses 
under undamaged and damaged conditions [38].  
3.4. Regional seismic risk assessment and community resilience 
Studies in this section deal with regional seismic risk assessment (RSRiA) and community resilience. 
RSRiA quantifies regional seismic impacts by convolving four sequential analysis modules: regional 
seismic hazard analysis, exposure modeling, damage and fragility assessment, and loss assessment [201], 
whereas community resilience studies further characterize post-earthquake function recovery for regional 
seismic resilience assessment (RSReA), as well as conduct restoration planning and optimization that help 
communities prioritize improvements to enhance/maximize seismic resilience [202]. RSRiA and RSReA 
holistically integrate various underlying physics processes and uncertainties that often require conducting 
a large number of Monte-Carlo simulations to deal with numerous interconnected structures. In this regard, 
DL has been applied as surrogate models at different layers to reduce the associated computational burden.  
 
 
Figure 15. DL applications in regional seismic risk assessment and resilient planning [39,51,52,139,203–210] 
As summarized in Figure 15, DL applications spread the entire spectrum of analysis modules for RSRiA 
and community resilience. In regional seismic hazard analysis, GRU has been applied to estimate the spatial 
probability of earthquake occurrence [210], whereas CNN [208] and GAN [39] have been utilized to 
develop surrogate models that directly generate GM intensity maps given earthquake source parameters. 
Exposure modeling poses challenges to capturing the topology and interdependency information of 
complex infrastructure networks, which has been addressed by developing a GNN model [203]. Seismic 
damage and fragility assessment involve finite element modeling or nonlinear analysis procedures to obtain 
probabilistic seismic demand models of different structural portfolios that vary in geometry, material 
property, design detail, etc. The time-consuming modeling and analysis efforts are dealt with by developing 
(1) a probabilistic CNN model that estimates area-wide structural damage given the spatial distribution of 
seismic intensity levels [206]; (2) a GAN-based seismic damage map under earthquake source inputs [39]; 
and (3) a DNN to estimate the variances and correlations of residuals in engineering demand parameters 
Regional 
seismic hazard 
analysis
Exposure 
modeling
Seismic 
damage/fragility 
assessment
Seismic loss 
assessment
Seismic 
resilience 
assessment
Restoration 
planning and 
optimization
DNN for post-earthquake 
connectivity of 
transportation network 
(Nabian and Meidani, 
2018)
Probabilistic CNN for 
regional seismic 
damage assessment 
(Kim et al., 2020)
Deep RL to generate 
reconstruction plans 
(Mudassir et al., 2021)
LSTM to assess earthquake 
vulnerability (Jena et al., 
2021)
CNN for seismic hazard 
mapping (Jena et al., 
2021)
DNN for traffic 
performance due to 
bridge damage (Silva-
Lopez et al., 2022)
GNN for repair action 
reward and RL for optimal 
repair sequence (Fan et al., 
2022)
GAN for GM intensity 
map (Li et al., 2023)
GAN for seismic damage 
map (Li et al., 2023)
GRU for earthquake 
occurrence (Jena et al., 
2023)
SRU for earthquake 
vulnerability map (Jena 
et al., 2023)
DNN to estimate seismic 
demand residuals (Kang 
et al., 2023)
GNN for network 
topology and 
interdependency 
information (Yang et al., 
2024)
Deep RL for optimal repair 
policies (Yang et al., 2024; 
Ali Anwar and Zhang, 2024)

--- Sayfa 15 ---
15 
 
[89]. For seismic loss assessment, seismic vulnerability maps have been generated using surrogate models 
developed by SRU and LSTM that consider social, structural, and geotechnical factors [207,210]. RSReA 
further examines the functionality states of structural systems, where DNNs have been applied to more 
rapidly predict (1) the changes in traffic performance metrics due to bridge damage [209] and (2) post-
earthquake connectivity of a transportation network [205]. To further support decision-making for 
community resilience, a deep RL algorithm has been utilized to generate reconstruction plans by 
considering the resources available and the needs of various stakeholders [51]. A convolutional GNN-
integrated deep RL model has been developed to select optimal repair decisions to maximize the seismic 
resilience of water distribution networks [52]. RL has also been applied to train neural networks that (1) 
approximate the optimal repair policies by considering uncertainties of the restoration process [203] and (2) 
simultaneously reduce retrofit costs and uncertain future consequences given seismic hazards [204].     
3.5. Ground motion for engineering use 
GM data has been used in various ways in earthquake engineering, ranging from ground motion models 
for probabilistic hazard analysis and design spectra definition, to regional hazard simulation and validation, 
time-series data as inputs for response history analysis and shaking table testing, and intensity measures for 
constituting fragility curves, etc. Several attempts have been made to leverage DL to deal with GM data 
that better serves its essential role in earthquake engineering research and practice (Figure 16). Dupuis et 
al. [211] trained a DNN to estimate the quality (i.e., a score factor determined by high-frequency noise, 
seismic waveform completeness, the slope and shape of the Fourier amplitude spectrum, instrument 
malfunction, and records with multiple earthquakes) and minimum usable frequency of GM records from 
earthquakes in New Zealand. The study is helpful for quality screening of GMs that will be particularly 
acute for the development of empirical ground-motion models and validation of physics-based ground-
motion simulations. Zhao et al. [212] trained a Siamese CNN to select GMs that have the mean response 
spectrum matches the target spectrum in all periods, whereas Matinfar et al. [213] and Matsumoto et al. [40] 
trained a GAN to generate artificial spectrum-compatible GMs with matching temporal and frequency 
characteristics. Moreover, Ning and Xie [43] developed an analysis workflow that transforms and 
reconstructs GMs through STFT, encodes and decodes their latent features through convolutional VAE, 
and classifies and generates GMs by grouping and interpolating latent variables. Their study indicated that 
using five classified, top-ranked motions, regardless of recorded or simulated accelerograms, can achieve 
reasonable and efficient fragility estimates compared to the case that adopts 230 GMs. Bond et al. [214] 
applied a similar AE approach for ground motion spectra clustering and selection. A couple of studies have 
also focused on handling GMs with mainshocks and aftershocks. Ding et al. [215] developed DNN and 
GAN to predict the spectral accelerations (Sa) of aftershocks using eight seismic variables and Sa of the 
mainshock at 21 periods as the model inputs. Fayaz and Galasso [216] used LSTM to develop a generalized 
ground-motion model that estimates consistent vectors of intensity measures for mainshocks and 
aftershocks. A somewhat unique attempt was to deal with GMs recorded through smart devices – an RNN 
was developed to detect and remove sliding motions in acceleration measurements from smart devices to 
reproduce realistic seismic shaking in structures [217]. 
 
 
Figure 16. DL to deal with ground motions for engineering use [40,43,211–217] 
3.6. Seismic response control 
Studies on structural control algorithms to intelligently control and mitigate seismic vibrations of 
structures in real-time have once attracted significant attention in the earthquake engineering community. 
Quality assessment
• DNN (Dupuis et al., 2023)
GM selection
•CNN (Zhao et al., 2022)
•Autoencoder (Ning and Xie, 
2023; Bond et al., 2024)
GM generation
•GAN (Matinfar et al., 2023)
•GAN (Matsumoto et al., 2023)
•Autoencoder (Ning and Xie, 
2023)
Mainshock-aftershock
•DNN, GAN (Ding et al., 2021)
•LSTM (Fayaz and Galasso, 
2022)
GM from smart device
•RNN (Na et al., 2022)

--- Sayfa 16 ---
16 
 
In this field, DL has shown its applications to be embedded into structural control frameworks through two 
modules. One is as a surrogate model, an emulator that predicts structural response history based on the 
previous response, control signal, and GM input. DL models as structural surrogates include an RNN [218] 
and an LSTM [219]. The other module is to train a DL-based controller that generates the new control 
signal (or input force to activate a protective device) in real-time to achieve the desired structural response. 
Such DL-based controllers have been trained through RNN [218] and RL [220,221], which determines the 
optimal control force to maximize a reward function that reduces both structural responses and the required 
control energy. To further enhance the efficiency and robustness of the control system, studies have also 
focused on developing (1) LSTM-based RNN as a data-driven controller for rapid online adaptation and 
processing, and pure online learning that minimizes reliance on pre-training [222] and (2) LSTM-based 
decentralized control method for high-rise buildings to reduce control complexity and improve fault 
tolerance [223]. In a separate study, LSTM was also used to classify earthquakes to determine the optimal 
control parameters for a semi-active variable stiffness isolation system [224]. 
3.7. Inverse problem – system/damage identification 
Studies compiled in this section deal with the inverse problem where DL is trained against seismic 
response measurements to identify the structural system or detect/classify seismic damage. CNN has shown 
more applications than other DL methods (e.g., [225]). Two studies indicated success in identifying system 
models and predicting component properties. Impraimakis [226] trained CNN to automatically detect the 
model class based on measured responses without requiring the input information from the model. Zeng et 
al. [227] developed a DNN and combined it with wavelet packet decomposition to simultaneously monitor 
axial pressure and shear deformation for laminated rubber bearings. More studies proposed DL approaches 
to train structural responses under different damage conditions and utilized the pre-trained model to identify 
or classify seismic damage states.  Zhou et al. [228] trained an AE model based on hysteresis loop analysis 
to predict the seismic damage index associated with stiffness degradation. Yu et al. [229] proposed a CNN 
method to deal with FFT data from raw sensor measurements and identify local damage for buildings 
installed with smart base isolators. Khodabandehlou et al. [230] developed a CNN to classify the seismic 
damage state of a reinforced concrete bridge using a limited number of acceleration measurements from 
the shake-table test. Lei et al. [231] detected structural damage subject to unknown seismic shaking by 
coupling the CNN with wavelet-based transmissibility data that eliminates the influence of different seismic 
excitations.   
4. Challenges and Opportunities 
The numerous DL applications reviewed indicate a significant surge of interest in the community in 
leveraging this advanced data-driven tool to deal with challenging problems in earthquake engineering. 
Over the decades, many of these problems have proven difficult to address despite the wealth of domain 
knowledge, primarily due to factors such as the uncertainty in earthquake occurrence, the unpredictable 
nature of the seismic load, the nonlinear structural response, the complex interdependency of the built 
environment, and the imperative of engaging communities for risk reduction and post-earthquake recovery, 
among others. Moving forward, DL is expected to be utilized as an essential tool for solving these problems, 
leveraging its data-driven capacity to achieve nonlinear mapping, sequential data modeling, automatic 
feature extraction, dimensionality reduction, optimal decision-making, etc.  
This review paper indicated a viable pathway showing which DL technique is appropriate for which 
category of problems. For instance, CNN and its variants should be considered with top priority to solve 
vision-related tasks such as vision-based seismic damage assessment and structural characterization (Figure 
11). Conversely, RNN, especially when employing LSTM units, is advantageous for dealing with temporal 
relations in the data, making it well-suited for research tasks such as seismic response history prediction 
(Figure 14) and real-time seismic response control (Section 3.6). Tailored for sequential decision-making, 
RL finds its promising application domain in community resilience studies, encompassing post-earthquake 
emergency response, recovery planning, and optimization (Figure 15). Unsupervised DL, such as GNN and 

--- Sayfa 17 ---
17 
 
AE, are fertile with opportunities to deal with GMs for engineering use, where one example would be to 
generate artificial GMs, as shown in Figure 16.   
 
 
Figure 17. Cumulative distribution function for the size of training data used for vision-based seismic damage 
assessment 
 
However, the pursuit of DL in earthquake engineering does not come without challenges. First, DL is a 
data-hungry technique, most often requiring the availability of massive, high-quality, labeled (for 
supervised learning) datasets to ensure its superior performance. Figure 17 indicates the distribution of 
training data sizes for DL applications in vision-based seismic damage assessment – the required quantity 
of training data varies significantly, ranging from hundreds to thousands of hundreds, contingent upon the 
type, scale, and resolution of the image data. Acquiring a sizable dataset may sometimes become intractable 
when dealing with real-world earthquake events because large and damaging earthquakes are (fortunately) 
rare. Also, a relevant concern would arise from the data unbalance issue – instances of seismic 
damage/collapse would be scarce as opposed to undamaged cases. The skewed data distribution not only 
complicates the DL training process, potentially leading to an overfitted model, but may also undermine 
the utilization of the DL model as, for instance, the cost for a false negative of true seismic damage might 
be high. In this regard, efforts should be made to synchronize the advancement of applicable DL techniques 
with the creation of accessible open-source datasets (e.g., [232]). One solution is to leverage data fusion 
techniques to develop multimodal, multitemporal, and heterogeneous datasets composed of different 
resolutions, data types (image, video, text, tabular, and sequential data), earthquake events, seismic regions, 
data sources (experimental testing, remote sensing, field measurement, and numerical simulation), and 
structural and infrastructure systems [70]. Accordingly, cutting-edge DL techniques such as TL [44], 
diffusion models [233], attention mechanisms [234], ensemble learning [235], self-supervised learning 
[236], and transformer models [237] can be explored to achieve a unified representation of complex big 
data for different research tasks in earthquake engineering.      
The understanding of the underlying physics has been considered arguably the most essential weapon 
for the community to address various earthquake engineering problems. Conversely, the black-box nature 
of DL models might cause an atmosphere of skepticism regarding their interpretability, reliability, 
robustness, and generalizability. DL applications in earthquake engineering are often safety-critical, making 
it crucial to interpret, understand, and trust the model’s decision-making process. While the interpretability 
of DL raises a concern in some relevant studies, no work has yet made efforts to explain the model’s learned 
parameters and weights, as well as understand the model behavior in depth. In this regard, different 
interpretability approaches, e.g., gradient-based attribution methods [238,239], guided back-propagation 
[240], concept activation vectors [241], deconvolution [242], class activation maps [243], layer-wise 
relevance propagation [244], etc., can be applied along with domain knowledge towards explainable DL 
for earthquake engineering.      
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.E+02
1.E+03
1.E+04
1.E+05
1.E+06
Cumulative Distribution 
Function
Size of Training Datasets

--- Sayfa 18 ---
18 
 
One more rigorous attempt is to integrate physics information into the development of DL models. Table 
1 lists relevant studies in earthquake engineering that develop physics-informed DL models. These studies 
focus on the prediction of seismic response histories of structural systems, where physical laws are obtained 
from the equations of motion (EOM) governing structures’ dynamics equilibriums. Therefore, physical 
constraints are introduced into the model training process by (1) implicitly incorporating physics loss into 
the loss function (Table 1), (2) embedding DL into the time-stepping integration method to solve the EOM 
[170,187], and (3) employing a GNN to represent the physical system (i.e., graph nodes for mass nodes, 
graph edges for dynamic interactions between nodes, and the adjacency matrix for the physical topology) 
[195]. While the embedding of physics into DL bears the potential to alleviate overfitting, reduce the need 
for big data, as well as improve the model robustness, accuracy, and extrapolation ability [190], these 
studies also underscore the premise that the seismic behavior of a structure needs to be fully characterized 
through an equivalent yet simplified multi-degrees of freedom (MDOF) system. This assumption poses a 
challenge when confronted with real-world structural systems, which may comprise numerous components 
forming a high-dimensional parameter space with complex topology, dynamics, and nonlinearity. Other 
than seismic response history prediction, the application of physics-informed DL is rarely observed in 
addressing other subjects in earthquake engineering.  
 
Table 1. Applications of physics-informed DL in earthquake engineering 
Paper 
Research Topic Number a 
DL Model 
Physics Information 
Xiong et al. [173] 
3 
CNN 
Loss Function 
Liu et al. [178] 
3 
LSTM 
Loss Function 
Guo et al. [170] 
3 
Residual Network 
Time-step integration 
Zhang et al. [190] 
3 
LSTM 
Loss Function 
Eshkevari et al. [187] 
3 
RNN 
Time-step integration 
Zhang et al. [189] 
3 
CNN 
Loss Function 
Chen et al. [195] 
3 
GNN 
Graph Node and Edge 
Chou et al. [150] 
2, 3 
LSTM, CNN 
Loss Function 
a Research topic number is shown in Figure 2.  
 
As the earthquake engineering community is moving away from relying on prescriptive approaches to 
increasingly embracing a probabilistic way of thinking [201], one important area for DL applications that 
remains relatively underexplored lies in uncertainty quantification. The literature review identifies a handful 
of relevant studies. Eltouny and Liang [168] presented an uncertainty-aware early warning system that can 
provide near real-time SHM under seismic hazards. Stephenson et al. [100] applied RNN to forecast a 
probability distribution of the coherence between pre- and post-event SAR images, providing a measure of 
confidence in the identification of seismic damage. Noureldin et al. [141] proposed ensemble probabilistic 
DL models toward quality-driven prediction intervals of seismic responses for low- to mid-rise buildings 
with limited irregularity. Kim et al. [142] adopted Bayesian DL for predicting both the mean and variance 
of seismic responses. Ali Anwar and Zhang [204] integrated Deep RL into a risk optimization framework 
to simultaneously reduce retrofit costs and uncertain future consequences given seismic hazards. Ning and 
Xie [43] targeted uncertainties in GMs; they devised a VAE model to classify and select a small set of 
motions that achieve reliable and efficient seismic fragility assessment. Feng et al. [132] trained a DNN 
model to predict the probabilistic distribution of high-fidelity results from low-fidelity simulations. These 
studies should serve as a starting point to advocate for additional endeavors that can further advance the 
research frontier of uncertainty quantification in earthquake engineering. 

--- Sayfa 19 ---
19 
 
 
5. Conclusion 
This paper conducts a comprehensive literature survey of Deep Learning (DL) applications in 
earthquake engineering. The survey starts with an introduction and discussion of the methodological 
advances for elucidating several applicable DL techniques. A thorough research landscape is disclosed, 
examining the extent of DL applications across various research topics, including vision-based seismic 
damage assessment and structural characterization, seismic demand and damage state prediction, seismic 
response history prediction, regional seismic risk assessment and community resilience, ground motion 
(GM) for engineering use, seismic response control, and the inverse problem of system/damage 
identification. The review delineates suitable DL techniques for different research topics, highlighting the 
superior performance of CNN for vision-based tasks, RNN for sequential data, RL for community resilience, 
and unsupervised learning for dealing with GMs. The paper also discusses opportunities and challenges for 
leveraging DL to further advance earthquake engineering research and practice. The scarcity of labeled 
datasets and the imbalance of seismic damage instances pose hurdles for DL training, emphasizing the 
urgent need for open-access multimodel big data, against which cutting-edge DL techniques need to be 
explored and applied. Additionally, concerns arise regarding the interpretability and trustworthiness of DL 
models in safety-critical applications. Efforts to enhance model interpretability and incorporate physics into 
DL are crucial (yet still challenging for real-world complex structural systems) to foster trust and 
understanding within the community. While DL also shows the potential to address uncertainty 
quantification in earthquake engineering, additional research is advocated to further advance this research 
frontier. 
 
Acknowledgments 
The author would like to thank Xiaoyu Liu and Chunxiao Ning from McGill University for preparing 
an initial list of relevant publications for this review article. 
 
References 
1. 
OpenAI, Achiam J, Adler S, Agarwal S, Ahmad L, Akkaya I, et al. GPT-4 Technical Report 2023; 4: 1–100. 
2. 
Russakovsky O, Deng J, Su H, Krause J, Satheesh S, Ma S, et al. ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. 
International Journal of Computer Vision 2015; 115(3): 211–252. DOI: 10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y. 
3. 
Girshick R, Donahue J, Darrell T, Malik J. Rich feature hierarchies for accurate object detection and semantic 
segmentation. Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2014: 
580–587. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2014.81. 
4. 
Shelhamer E, Long J, Darrell T. Fully Convolutional Networks for Semantic Segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern 
Analysis and Machine Intelligence 2017; 39(4): 640–651. DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2572683. 
5. 
Hinton G, Deng L, Yu D, Dahl G, Mohamed AR, Jaitly N, et al. Deep neural networks for acoustic modeling in speech 
recognition: The shared views of four research groups. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 2012; 29(6): 82–97. DOI: 
10.1109/MSP.2012.2205597. 
6. 
Esteva A, Kuprel B, Novoa RA, Ko J, Swetter SM, Blau HM, et al. Dermatologist-level classification of skin cancer with 
deep neural networks. Nature 2017; 542(7639): 115–118. DOI: 10.1038/nature21056. 
7. 
Silver D, Huang A, Maddison CJ, Guez A, Sifre L, Van Den Driessche G, et al. Mastering the game of Go with deep 
neural networks and tree search. Nature 2016; 529(7587): 484–489. DOI: 10.1038/nature16961. 
8. 
Levine S, Finn C, Darrell T, Abbeel P. End-to-end training of deep visuomotor policies. Journal of Machine Learning 
Research 2016; 17: 1–40. 
9. 
Shalev-Shwartz S, Shammah S, Shashua A. Safe Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Driving. Proc 
NIPS Workshop Learn, Inference Control Multi-Agent Syst 2016. DOI: 10.5626/ktcp.2018.24.12.670. 
10. 
Xie Y, Ebad Sichani M, Padgett JE, DesRoches R. The promise of implementing machine learning in earthquake 
engineering: A state-of-the-art review. Earthquake Spectra 2020; 36(4): 1769–1801. DOI: 10.1177/8755293020919419. 
11. 
Zhang W, Li H, Li Y, Liu H, Chen Y, Ding X. Application of deep learning algorithms in geotechnical engineering: a 

--- Sayfa 20 ---
20 
 
short critical review. vol. 54. Springer Netherlands; 2021. DOI: 10.1007/s10462-021-09967-1. 
12. 
Avci O, Abdeljaber O, Kiranyaz S, Hussein M, Gabbouj M, Inman DJ. A review of vibration-based damage detection in 
civil structures: From traditional methods to Machine Learning and Deep Learning applications. Mechanical Systems and 
Signal Processing 2021; 147. DOI: 10.1016/j.ymssp.2020.107077. 
13. 
Mousavi SM, Beroza GC. Deep-learning seismology. Science 2022; 377(6607). DOI: 10.1126/science.abm4470. 
14. 
Lingxin Z, Junkai S, Baijie Z. A review of the research and application of deep learning-based computer vision in structural 
damage detection. Earthquake Engineering and Engineering Vibration 2022; 21(1): 1–21. DOI: 10.1007/s11803-022-
2074-7. 
15. 
Jia J, Ye W. Deep Learning for Earthquake Disaster Assessment: Objects, Data, Models, Stages, Challenges, and 
Opportunities. Remote Sensing 2023; 15(16). DOI: 10.3390/rs15164098. 
16. 
Marano GC, Rosso MM, Aloisio A, Cirrincione G. Generative adversarial networks review in earthquake-related 
engineering fields. Springer Netherlands; 2023. DOI: 10.1007/s10518-023-01645-7. 
17. 
Cha YJ, Ali R, Lewis J, Büyükӧztürk O. Deep learning-based structural health monitoring. Automation in Construction 
2024; 161(February). DOI: 10.1016/j.autcon.2024.105328. 
18. 
Gao Y, Kong B, Mosalam KM. Deep leaf-bootstrapping generative adversarial network for structural image data 
augmentation. Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 2019; 34(9): 755–773. DOI: 10.1111/mice.12458. 
19. 
Mangalathu S, Burton H V. Deep learning-based classification of earthquake-impacted buildings using textual damage 
descriptions. 
International 
Journal 
of 
Disaster 
Risk 
Reduction 
2019; 
36(February): 
101111. 
DOI: 
10.1016/j.ijdrr.2019.101111. 
20. 
Lu X, Liao W, Zhang Y, Huang Y. Intelligent structural design of shear wall residence using physics-enhanced generative 
adversarial networks. Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics 2022; 51(7): 1657–1676. DOI: 10.1002/eqe.3632. 
21. 
Liao W, Wang X, Fei Y, Huang Y, Xie L, Lu X. Base-isolation design of shear wall structures using physics-rule-co-
guided self-supervised generative adversarial networks. Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics 2023; 52(11): 
3281–3303. DOI: 10.1002/eqe.3862. 
22. 
Vecteezy. Damaged building vector illustration. Building destroyed 2024: 1. https://www.vecteezy.com/vector-
art/19049844-damaged-building-vector-illustration-building-destroyed. 
23. 
Wang C, Hornauer S, Yu SX, McKenna F, Law KH. Instance segmentation of soft-story buildings from street-view images 
with semiautomatic annotation. Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics 2023; 52(8): 2520–2532. DOI: 
10.1002/eqe.3805. 
24. 
Simonyan K, Zisserman A. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition. 3rd International 
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015 - Conference Track Proceedings 2015: 1–14. 
25. 
Yao Y, Luo Z, Li S, Fang T, Quan L. MVSNet: Depth inference for unstructured multi-view stereo. Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science (Including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 2018; 
11212 LNCS: 785–801. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-01237-3_47. 
26. 
Krizhevksy A, Sutskever I, Hinton GE. ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks. Advances in 
Neural Information Processing Systems 25 (NIPS 2012) 2012: 1–9. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-374105-9.00493-7. 
27. 
Lin G, Milan A, Shen C, Reid I. RefineNet: Multi-path refinement networks for high-resolution semantic segmentation. 
Proceedings - 30th IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2017 2017; 2017-Janua: 5168–
5177. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.549. 
28. 
Ren S, He K, Girshick R, Sun J. Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-Time Object Detection with Region Proposal Networks. 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 28 (2015) 2015: 1–9. DOI: 10.4324/9780080519340-12. 
29. 
He K, Gkioxari G, Dollar P, Girshick R. Mask R-CNN. Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer 
Vision (ICCV) 2017: 2961–2969. 
30. 
Redmon J, Divvala S, Girshick R, Farhadi A. You Only Look Once: Unified, Real-Time Object Detection Joseph. 
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) 2016: 779–788. DOI: 
10.1145/3243394.3243692. 
31. 
Ronneberger O, Fischer P, Brox T. U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation. International 
Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention 2015; 9351(Cvd): 12–20. DOI: 
10.1007/978-3-319-24574-4. 
32. 
He K, Zhang X, Ren S, Sun J. Deep residual learning for image recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society 
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2016; 2016-Decem: 770–778. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90. 
33. 
Goodfellow I, Bengio Y CA. Deep learning. MIT press; 2016. 
34. 
Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J. Long Short-Term Memory. Neural Computation 1997; 1780: 1735–1780. 
35. 
Cho K, Van Merriënboer B, Gulcehre C, Bahdanau D, Bougares F, Schwenk H, et al. Learning phrase representations 
using RNN encoder-decoder for statistical machine translation. EMNLP 2014 - 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods 

--- Sayfa 21 ---
21 
 
in Natural Language Processing, Proceedings of the Conference 2014: 1724–1734. DOI: 10.3115/v1/d14-1179. 
36. 
Ian Goodfellow, Pouget-Abadie J, Mirza M, Xu B, Warde-Farley D, Ozair S, et al. Generative Adversarial Nets. Advances 
in Neural Information Processing Systems 27 (NIPS 2014) 2014: 1–9. DOI: 10.1007/s10994-023-06367-0. 
37. 
Gao Y, Zhai P, Mosalam KM. Balanced semisupervised generative adversarial network for damage assessment from low-
data imbalanced-class regime. Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 2021; 36(9): 1094–1113. DOI: 
10.1111/mice.12741. 
38. 
Gatti F, Rosafalco L, Colombera G, Mariani S, Corigliano A. Multi-storey shear type buildings under earthquake loading: 
Adversarial learning-based prediction of the transient dynamics and damage classification. Soil Dynamics and Earthquake 
Engineering 2023; 173(April): 108141. DOI: 10.1016/j.soildyn.2023.108141. 
39. 
Li S, Farrar C, Yang Y. Efficient regional seismic risk assessment via deep generative learning of surrogate models. 
Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics 2023; 52(11): 3435–3454. DOI: 10.1002/eqe.3849. 
40. 
Matsumoto Y, Yaoyama T, Lee S, Hida T, Itoi T. Fundamental study on probabilistic generative modeling of earthquake 
ground motion time histories using generative adversarial networks. Japan Architectural Review 2023; 6(1). DOI: 
10.1002/2475-8876.12392. 
41. 
DOERSCH C. Tutorial on Variational Autoencoders. ArXiv 2021: 1–23. DOI: arXiv:1606.05908. 
42. 
Cao X, Chen L, Chen J, Li J, Lu W, Liu H, et al. Seismic damage identification of high arch dams based on an unsupervised 
deep learning approach. Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering 2023; 168(September 2022): 107834. DOI: 
10.1016/j.soildyn.2023.107834. 
43. 
Ning C, Xie Y. Convolutional variational autoencoder for ground motion classification and generation toward efficient 
seismic fragility assessment. Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 2023: 1–21. DOI: 
10.1111/mice.13061. 
44. 
Pan SJ, Yang Q. A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 2010; 22(10): 
1345–1359. DOI: 10.1109/TKDE.2009.191. 
45. 
Abdi G, Jabari S. A Multi-Feature Fusion Using Deep Transfer Learning for Earthquake Building Damage Detection. 
Canadian Journal of Remote Sensing 2021; 47(2): 337–352. DOI: 10.1080/07038992.2021.1925530. 
46. 
Dogan G, Hakan Arslan M, Ilki A. Detection of damages caused by earthquake and reinforcement corrosion in RC 
buildings 
with 
Deep 
Transfer 
Learning. 
Engineering 
Structures 
2023; 
279(January): 
115629. 
DOI: 
10.1016/j.engstruct.2023.115629. 
47. 
Sutton RS, Barto AG. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. 2nd editio. The MIT Press; 2014. DOI: 
10.1108/k.1998.27.9.1093.3. 
48. 
Mnih V, Kavukcuoglu K, Silver D, Rusu AA, Veness J, Bellemare MG, et al. Human-level control through deep 
reinforcement learning. Nature 2015; 518(7540): 529–533. DOI: 10.1038/nature14236. 
49. 
Sutton RS, McAllester DA, Singh SP MY. Policy gradient methods for reinforcement learning with function 
approximation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 1999; 12(1057–1063). 
50. 
Mnih V, Mirza M, Graves A, Harley T, Lillicrap TP, Silver D. Asynchronous Methods for Deep Reinforcement Learning 
arXiv : 1602 . 01783v2 [ cs . LG ] 16 Jun 2016 2016; 48. 
51. 
Mudassir G, Howard EE, Pasquini L, Arbib C, Clementini E, Marco A Di, et al. Toward Effective Response to Natural 
Disasters: 
A 
Data 
Science 
Approach. 
IEEE 
Access 
2021; 
9(October 
2020): 
167827–167844. 
DOI: 
10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3135054. 
52. 
Fan X, Zhang X, Yu X. A graph convolution network-deep reinforcement learning model for resilient water distribution 
network repair decisions. Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 2022; 37(12): 1547–1565. DOI: 
10.1111/mice.12813. 
53. 
Zhou J, Cui G, Hu S, Zhang Z, Yang C, Liu Z, et al. Graph neural networks: A review of methods and applications. AI 
Open 2020; 1(September 2020): 57–81. DOI: 10.1016/j.aiopen.2021.01.001. 
54. 
Wu Z, Pan S, Chen F, Long G, Zhang C, Yu PS. A Comprehensive Survey on Graph Neural Networks. IEEE Transactions 
on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 2021; 32(1): 4–24. DOI: 10.1109/TNNLS.2020.2978386. 
55. 
Ji M, Liu L, Buchroithner M. Identifying collapsed buildings using post-earthquake satellite imagery and convolutional 
neural networks: A case study of the 2010 Haiti Earthquake. Remote Sensing 2018; 10(11). DOI: 10.3390/rs10111689. 
56. 
Tazarv M, Won K, Jang Y, Hart K, Greeneway E. Post-earthquake serviceability assessment of standard RC bridge 
columns using computer vision and seismic analyses. Engineering Structures 2022; 272(September): 115002. DOI: 
10.1016/j.engstruct.2022.115002. 
57. 
Xu Y, Qiao W, Zhao J, Zhang Q, Li H. Vision-based multi-level synthetical evaluation of seismic damage for RC structural 
components: a multi-task learning approach. Earthquake Engineering and Engineering Vibration 2023; 22(1): 69–85. 
DOI: 10.1007/s11803-023-2153-4. 
58. 
Ghosh Mondal T, Jahanshahi MR, Wu RT, Wu ZY. Deep learning-based multi-class damage detection for autonomous 

--- Sayfa 22 ---
22 
 
post-disaster reconnaissance. Structural Control and Health Monitoring 2020; 27(4): 1–15. DOI: 10.1002/stc.2507. 
59. 
Miao Z, Ji X, Wu M, Gao X. Deep learning-based evaluation for mechanical property degradation of seismically damaged 
RC columns. Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics 2023; 52(8): 2498–2519. DOI: 10.1002/eqe.3749. 
60. 
Chou JS, Karundeng MA, Truong DN, Cheng MY. Identifying deflections of reinforced concrete beams under seismic 
loads by bio-inspired optimization of deep residual learning. Structural Control and Health Monitoring 2022; 29(4): 1–
24. DOI: 10.1002/stc.2918. 
61. 
Li Y, Cui P, Ye C, Marcato Junior J, Zhang Z, Guo J, et al. Accurate prediction of earthquake-induced landslides based 
on deep learning considering landslide source area. Remote Sensing 2021; 13(17). DOI: 10.3390/rs13173436. 
62. 
Hacıefendioğlu K, Başağa HB, Demir G. Automatic detection of earthquake-induced ground failure effects through Faster 
R-CNN deep learning-based object detection using satellite images. Natural Hazards 2021; 105(1): 383–403. DOI: 
10.1007/s11069-020-04315-y. 
63. 
Nex F, Duarte D, Tonolo FG, Kerle N. Structural building damage detection with deep learning: Assessment of a state-
of-the-art CNN in operational conditions. Remote Sensing 2019; 11(23). DOI: 10.3390/rs11232765. 
64. 
Kawabe K, Horie K, Inoguchi M, Matsuoka M, Torisawa K, Liu W, et al. Extraction of Story-Collapsed Buildings By the 
2016 Kumamoto Earthquake Using Deep Learning. 17th World Conference on Earthquake Engineering 2020: 1–9. 
65. 
Wang Y, Jing X, Xu Y, Cui L, Zhang Q, Li H. Geometry-guided semantic segmentation for post-earthquake buildings 
using optical remote sensing images. Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics 2023; 52(11): 3392–3413. DOI: 
10.1002/eqe.3966. 
66. 
Ma H, Liu Y, Ren Y, Yu J. Detection of collapsed buildings in post-earthquake remote sensing images based on the 
improved YOLOv3. Remote Sensing 2020; 12(1). DOI: 10.3390/RS12010044. 
67. 
Bai Y, Sezen H, Yilmaz A. End-to-end deep learning methods for automated damage detection in extreme events at various 
scales. 
Proceedings 
- 
International 
Conference 
on 
Pattern 
Recognition 
2020: 
5736–5743. 
DOI: 
10.1109/ICPR48806.2021.9413041. 
68. 
Wang J, Lei Y, Yang X, Zhang F. A refinement network embedded with attention mechanism for computer vision based 
post-earthquake 
inspections 
of 
railway 
viaduct. 
Engineering 
Structures 
2023; 
279: 
115572. 
DOI: 
10.1016/j.engstruct.2022.115572. 
69. 
Ogunjinmi PD, Park SS, Kim B, Lee DE. Rapid Post-Earthquake Structural Damage Assessment Using Convolutional 
Neural Networks and Transfer Learning. Sensors 2022; 22(9): 1–20. DOI: 10.3390/s22093471. 
70. 
Adriano B, Yokoya N, Xia J, Miura H, Liu W, Matsuoka M, et al. Learning from multimodal and multitemporal earth 
observation data for building damage mapping. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 2021; 175(July 
2020): 132–143. DOI: 10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2021.02.016. 
71. 
Bai Y, Zha B, Sezen H, Yilmaz A. Engineering deep learning methods on automatic detection of damage in infrastructure 
due to extreme events. Structural Health Monitoring 2023; 22(1): 338–352. DOI: 10.1177/14759217221083649. 
72. 
Bernabe S, Gonzalez C, Fernandez A, Bhangale U. Portability and Acceleration of Deep Learning Inferences to Detect 
Rapid Earthquake Damage from VHR Remote Sensing Images Using Intel OpenVINO Toolkit. IEEE Journal of Selected 
Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing 2021; 14: 6906–6915. DOI: 10.1109/JSTARS.2021.3075961. 
73. 
Bhatta S, Dang J. Multiclass seismic damage detection of buildings using quantum convolutional neural network. 
Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 2023: 1–18. DOI: 10.1111/mice.13084. 
74. 
Chen F, Yu B. Earthquake-Induced Building Damage Mapping Based on Multi-Task Deep Learning Framework. IEEE 
Access 2019; 7: 181396–181404. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2958983. 
75. 
Ci T, Liu Z, Wang Y. Assessment of the degree of building damage caused by disaster using convolutional neural networks 
in combination with ordinal regression. Remote Sensing 2019; 11(23). DOI: 10.3390/rs11232858. 
76. 
Fujita S, Hatayama M. Estimation Method for Roof‐damaged Buildings from Aero-Photo Images During Earthquakes 
Using Deep Learning. Information Systems Frontiers 2021: 351–363. DOI: 10.1007/s10796-021-10124-w. 
77. 
Gao Y, Mosalam KM. Deep Transfer Learning for Image-Based Structural Damage Recognition. Computer-Aided Civil 
and Infrastructure Engineering 2018; 33(9): 748–768. DOI: 10.1111/mice.12363. 
78. 
Hong Z, Yang Y, Liu J, Jiang S, Pan H, Zhou R, et al. Enhancing 3D Reconstruction Model by Deep Learning and Its 
Application in Building Damage Assessment after Earthquake. Applied Sciences (Switzerland) 2022; 12(19). DOI: 
10.3390/app12199790. 
79. 
Ji M, Liu L, Du R, Buchroithner MF. A comparative study of texture and convolutional neural network features for 
detecting collapsed buildings after earthquakes using pre- and post-event satellite imagery. Remote Sensing 2019; 11(10). 
DOI: 10.3390/rs11101202. 
80. 
Ji M, Liu L, Zhang R, Buchroithner MF. Discrimination of earthquake-induced building destruction from space using a 
pretrained CNN model. Applied Sciences (Switzerland) 2020; 10(2). DOI: 10.3390/app10020602. 
81. 
Ji X, Zhuang Y, Miao Z, Cheng Y. Vision-based seismic damage detection and residual capacity assessment for an RC 

--- Sayfa 23 ---
23 
 
shaking table test structure. Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics 2023; 52(3): 806–827. DOI: 
10.1002/eqe.3788. 
82. 
Kalantar B, Ueda N, Al-Najjar HAH, Halin AA. Assessment of convolutional neural network architectures for earthquake-
induced building damage detection based on pre-and post-event orthophoto images. Remote Sensing 2020; 12(21): 1–20. 
DOI: 10.3390/rs12213529. 
83. 
Kong Q, Gu J, Xiong B, Yuan C. Vision-aided three-dimensional damage quantification and finite element model 
geometric updating for reinforced concrete structures. Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 2023; 38(17): 
2378–2390. DOI: 10.1111/mice.12967. 
84. 
Levine NM, Narazaki Y, Spencer BF. Development of a building information model-guided post-earthquake building 
inspection framework using 3D synthetic environments. Earthquake Engineering and Engineering Vibration 2023; 22(2): 
279–307. DOI: 10.1007/s11803-023-2167-y. 
85. 
Liang X. Image-based post-disaster inspection of reinforced concrete bridge systems using deep learning with Bayesian 
optimization. Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 2019; 34(5): 415–430. DOI: 10.1111/mice.12425. 
86. 
Lin Q, Ci T, Wang L, Mondal SK, Yin H, Wang Y. Transfer Learning for Improving Seismic Building Damage 
Assessment. Remote Sensing 2022; 14(201): 1–15. DOI: 10.1179/030716984803274756. 
87. 
Ma H, Liu Y, Ren Y, Wang D, Yu L, Yu J. Improved CNN classification method for groups of buildings damaged by 
earthquake, based on high resolution remote sensing images. Remote Sensing 2020; 12(2). DOI: 10.3390/rs12020260. 
88. 
Miao Z, Ji X, Okazaki T, Takahashi N. Pixel-level multicategory detection of visible seismic damage of reinforced 
concrete components. Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 2021; 36(5): 620–637. DOI: 
10.1111/mice.12667. 
89. 
Miura H, Aridome T, Matsuoka M. Deep learning-based identification of collapsed, non-collapsed and blue tarp-covered 
buildings from post-disaster aerial images. Remote Sensing 2020; 12(12). DOI: 10.3390/rs12121924. 
90. 
Miyamoto T, Yamamoto Y. Using 3-D Convolution and Multimodal Architecture for Earthquake Damage Detection 
Based on Satellite Imagery and Digital Urban Data. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and 
Remote Sensing 2021; 14: 8606–8613. DOI: 10.1109/JSTARS.2021.3102701. 
91. 
Naito S, Tomozawa H, Mori Y, Nagata T, Monma N, Nakamura H, et al. Building-damage detection method based on 
machine learning utilizing aerial photographs of the Kumamoto earthquake. Earthquake Spectra 2020; 36(3): 1166–1187. 
DOI: 10.1177/8755293019901309. 
92. 
Pan X, Yang TY. Postdisaster image-based damage detection and repair cost estimation of reinforced concrete buildings 
using dual convolutional neural networks. Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 2020; 35(5): 495–510. 
DOI: 10.1111/mice.12549. 
93. 
Patterson B, Leone G, Pantoja M, Behrouzi A. Deep learning for automated image classification of seismic damage to 
built infrastructure. 11th National Conference on Earthquake Engineering 2018, NCEE 2018: Integrating Science, 
Engineering, and Policy 2018; 10: 6561–6571. 
94. 
Rahman T, Ahmed Y, Alam T, Shakil MHR, Hossain MT, Khan FN, et al. Evaluation of Earthquake Resistance of Urban 
Buildings using Image Processing and Machine Learning Techniques. 2020 IEEE Asia-Pacific Conference on Computer 
Science and Data Engineering, CSDE 2020 2020. DOI: 10.1109/CSDE50874.2020.9411582. 
95. 
Rashidian V, Baise LG, Koch M, Moaveni B. Detecting demolished buildings after a natural hazard using high resolution 
rgb satellite imagery and modified u‐net convolutional neural networks. Remote Sensing 2021; 13(11). DOI: 
10.3390/rs13112176. 
96. 
Saida T, Rashid M, Nemoto Y, Tsukamoto S, Asai T, Nishio M. CNN-based segmentation frameworks for structural 
component and earthquake damage determinations using UAV images. Earthquake Engineering and Engineering 
Vibration 2023; 22(2): 359–369. DOI: 10.1007/s11803-023-2174-z. 
97. 
Settou T, Kholladi MK, Ben Ali A. Improving damage classification via hybrid deep learning feature representations 
derived from post-earthquake aerial images. International Journal of Image and Data Fusion 2022; 13(1): 1–20. DOI: 
10.1080/19479832.2020.1864787. 
98. 
Seydi ST, Rastiveis H, Kalantar B, Halin AA, Ueda N. BDD-Net: An End-to-End Multiscale Residual CNN for 
Earthquake-Induced Building Damage Detection. Remote Sensing 2022; 14(9). DOI: 10.3390/rs14092214. 
99. 
Song D, Tan X, Wang B, Zhang L, Shan X, Cui J. Integration of super-pixel segmentation and deep-learning methods for 
evaluating earthquake-damaged buildings using single-phase remote sensing imagery. International Journal of Remote 
Sensing 2020; 41(3): 1040–1066. DOI: 10.1080/01431161.2019.1655175. 
100. 
Stephenson OL, Kohne T, Zhan E, Cahill BE, Yun SH, Ross ZE, et al. Deep Learning-Based Damage Mapping with 
InSAR Coherence Time Series. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 2022; 60. DOI: 
10.1109/TGRS.2021.3084209. 
101. 
Sun G, Hao Y, Rong J, Shi S, Ren J. Combined Deep Learning and Multiscale Segmentation for Rapid High Resolution 
Damage Mapping. Proceedings - 2017 IEEE International Conference on Internet of Things, IEEE Green Computing and 

--- Sayfa 24 ---
24 
 
Communications, IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing, IEEE Smart Data, IThings-GreenCom-CPSCom-
SmartData 2017 2017; 2018-Janua: 1101–1105. DOI: 10.1109/iThings-GreenCom-CPSCom-SmartData.2017.238. 
102. 
Takhtkeshha N, Mohammadzadeh A, Salehi B. A Rapid Self-Supervised Deep-Learning-Based Method for Post-
Earthquake Damage Detection Using UAV Data (Case Study: Sarpol-e Zahab, Iran). Remote Sensing 2023; 15(1). DOI: 
10.3390/rs15010123. 
103. 
Vetrivel A, Gerke M, Kerle N, Nex F, Vosselman G. Disaster damage detection through synergistic use of deep learning 
and 3D point cloud features derived from very high resolution oblique aerial images, and multiple-kernel-learning. ISPRS 
Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 2018; 140: 45–59. DOI: 10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2017.03.001. 
104. 
Wang Y, Cui L, Zhang C, Chen W, Xu Y, Zhang Q. A Two-Stage Seismic Damage Assessment Method for Small, Dense, 
and Imbalanced Buildings in Remote Sensing Images. Remote Sensing 2022; 14(4): 1–30. DOI: 10.3390/rs14041012. 
105. 
Wang Y, Jing X, Chen W, Li H, Xu Y, Zhang Q. Geometry-informed deep learning-based structural component 
segmentation of post-earthquake buildings. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 2023; 188(March 2022): 110028. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.ymssp.2022.110028. 
106. 
Wang Y, Jing X, Cui L, Zhang C, Xu Y, Yuan J, et al. Geometric consistency enhanced deep convolutional encoder-
decoder for urban seismic damage assessment by UAV images. Engineering Structures 2023; 286(November 2022): 
116132. DOI: 10.1016/j.engstruct.2023.116132. 
107. 
Xiong C, Li Q, Lu X. Automated regional seismic damage assessment of buildings using an unmanned aerial vehicle and 
a convolutional neural network. Automation in Construction 2020; 109(October 2019): 102994. DOI: 
10.1016/j.autcon.2019.102994. 
108. 
Xiu H, Shinohara T, Matsuoka M, Inoguchi M, Kawabe K, Horie K. Collapsed building detection using 3D point clouds 
and deep learning. Remote Sensing 2020; 12(24 1): 24. DOI: 10.3390/rs12244057. 
109. 
Xu Y, Wei S, Bao Y, Li H. Automatic seismic damage identification of reinforced concrete columns from images by a 
region-based deep convolutional neural network. Structural Control and Health Monitoring 2019; 26(3): 1–22. DOI: 
10.1002/stc.2313. 
110. 
Yang W, Zhang X, Luo P. Transferability of convolutional neural network models for identifying damaged buildings due 
to earthquake. Remote Sensing 2021; 13(3): 1–20. DOI: 10.3390/rs13030504. 
111. 
Ye XW, Ma SY, Liu ZX, Ding Y, Li ZX, Jin T. Post-earthquake damage recognition and condition assessment of bridges 
using UAV integrated with deep learning approach. Structural Control and Health Monitoring 2022; 29(12): 1–15. DOI: 
10.1002/stc.3128. 
112. 
Yoon S, Spencer BF, Lee S, Jung HJ, Kim IH. A novel approach to assess the seismic performance of deteriorated bridge 
structures by employing UAV-based damage detection. Structural Control and Health Monitoring 2022; 29(7): 1–18. 
DOI: 10.1002/stc.2964. 
113. 
Zhan Y, Liu W, Maruyama Y. Damaged Building Extraction Using Modified Mask R-CNN Model Using Post-Event 
Aerial Images of the 2016 Kumamoto Earthquake. Remote Sensing 2022; 14(4). DOI: 10.3390/rs14041002. 
114. 
Zhang W, Wang R, Chen X, Jia D, Zhou Z. Systematic assessment method for post-earthquake damage of regional 
buildings using adaptive-network-based fuzzy inference system. Journal of Building Engineering 2023; 78(August): 
107682. DOI: 10.1016/j.jobe.2023.107682. 
115. 
Zheng Y, Gao Y, Lu S, Mosalam KM. Multistage semisupervised active learning framework for crack identification, 
segmentation, and measurement of bridges. Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 2022; 37(9): 1089–
1108. DOI: 10.1111/mice.12851. 
116. 
Zou D, Zhang M, Bai Z, Liu T, Zhou A, Wang X, et al. Multicategory damage detection and safety assessment of post-
earthquake reinforced concrete structures using deep learning. Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 2022; 
37(9): 1188–1204. DOI: 10.1111/mice.12815. 
117. 
Guo Y, Wang C, Yu SX, McKenna F, Law KH. AdaLN: A Vision Transformer for Multidomain Learning and Predisaster 
Building Information Extraction from Images. Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering 2022; 36(5): 1–12. DOI: 
10.1061/(asce)cp.1943-5487.0001034. 
118. 
Wang C, Antos SE, Triveno LM. Automatic detection of unreinforced masonry buildings from street view images using 
deep learning-based image segmentation. Automation in Construction 2021; 132(February): 103968. DOI: 
10.1016/j.autcon.2021.103968. 
119. 
Rueda-Plata D, González D, Acevedo AB, Duque JC, Ramos-Pollán R. Use of deep learning models in street-level images 
to classify one-story unreinforced masonry buildings based on roof diaphragms. Building and Environment 2021; 
189(August 2020). DOI: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2020.107517. 
120. 
Narazaki Y, Hoskere V, Hoang TA, Fujino Y, Sakurai A, Spencer BF. Vision-based automated bridge component 
recognition with high-level scene consistency. Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 2020; 35(5): 465–
482. DOI: 10.1111/mice.12505. 
121. 
Yu Q, Wang C, McKenna F, Yu SX, Taciroglu E, Cetiner B, et al. Rapid visual screening of soft-story buildings from 

--- Sayfa 25 ---
25 
 
street view images using deep learning classification. Earthquake Engineering and Engineering Vibration 2020; 19(4): 
827–838. DOI: 10.1007/s11803-020-0598-2. 
122. 
Kalfarisi R, Hmosze M, Wu ZY. Detecting and Geolocating City-Scale Soft-Story Buildings by Deep Machine Learning 
for Urban Seismic Resilience. Natural Hazards Review 2022; 23(1): 1–12. DOI: 10.1061/(asce)nh.1527-6996.0000541. 
123. 
Aravena Pelizari P, Geiß C, Aguirre P, Santa María H, Merino Peña Y, Taubenböck H. Automated building 
characterization for seismic risk assessment using street-level imagery and deep learning. ISPRS Journal of 
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 2021; 180(March): 370–386. DOI: 10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2021.07.004. 
124. 
Gonzalez D, Rueda-Plata D, Acevedo AB, Duque JC, Ramos-Pollán R, Betancourt A, et al. Automatic detection of 
building typology using deep learning methods on street level images. Building and Environment 2020; 177(January): 1–
12. DOI: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2020.106805. 
125. 
Zhang X, Beck C, Lenjani A, Bonthron L, Lund A, Liu X, et al. Enabling Rapid Large-Scale Seismic Bridge Vulnerability 
Assessment Through Artificial Intelligence. Transportation Research Record 2023; 2677(2): 1354–1372. DOI: 
10.1177/03611981221112950. 
126. 
Ji K, Zhu C, Yaghmaei-Sabegh S, Lu J, Ren Y, Wen R. Site classification using deep-learning-based image recognition 
techniques. Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics 2023; 52(8): 2323–2338. DOI: 10.1002/eqe.3801. 
127. 
Chen PY, Wu ZY, Taciroglu E. Classification of Soft-Story Buildings Using Deep Learning with Density Features 
Extracted from 3D Point Clouds. Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering 2021; 35(3): 1–11. DOI: 
10.1061/(asce)cp.1943-5487.0000968. 
128. 
Hu J, Wen W, Zhang C, Zhai C, Pei S, Wang Z. Rapid peak seismic response prediction of two-story and three-span 
subway stations using deep learning method. Engineering Structures 2024; 300(August 2023): 117214. DOI: 
10.1016/j.engstruct.2023.117214. 
129. 
Kim T, Kwon OS, Song J. Deep learning based seismic response prediction of hysteretic systems having degradation and 
pinching. Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics 2023; 52(8): 2384–2406. DOI: 10.1002/eqe.3796. 
130. 
Lu X, Xu Y, Tian Y, Cetiner B, Taciroglu E. A deep learning approach to rapid regional post-event seismic damage 
assessment using time-frequency distributions of ground motions. Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics 2021; 
50(6): 1612–1627. DOI: 10.1002/eqe.3415. 
131. 
Mangalathu S, Jeon JS. Ground Motion-Dependent Rapid Damage Assessment of Structures Based on Wavelet Transform 
and Image Analysis Techniques. Journal of Structural Engineering 2020; 146(11). DOI: 10.1061/(asce)st.1943-
541x.0002793. 
132. 
Methods C, Mech A, Feng D cheng, Chen S zhi, Taciroglu E. Deep learning-enhanced efficient seismic analysis of 
structures with multi-fidelity modeling strategies. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 2024; 
421(May 2023): 116775. DOI: 10.1016/j.cma.2024.116775. 
133. 
Wang M, Zhang H, Dai H, Shen L. A deep learning-aided seismic fragility analysis method for bridges. Structures 2022; 
40(November 2021): 1056–1064. DOI: 10.1016/j.istruc.2022.04.058. 
134. 
Wen W, Zhang C, Zhai C. Rapid seismic response prediction of RC frames based on deep learning and limited building 
information. Engineering Structures 2022; 267(July): 114638. DOI: 10.1016/j.engstruct.2022.114638. 
135. 
Ahmed B, Mangalathu S, Jeon JS. Seismic damage state predictions of reinforced concrete structures using stacked long 
short-term memory neural networks. Journal of Building Engineering 2022; 46(September 2021): 103737. DOI: 
10.1016/j.jobe.2021.103737. 
136. 
Ahmed B, Mangalathu S, Jeon JS. Generalized stacked LSTM for the seismic damage evaluation of ductile reinforced 
concrete buildings. Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics 2023; 52(11): 3477–3503. DOI: 10.1002/eqe.3869. 
137. 
Xu Y, Lu X, Cetiner B, Taciroglu E. Real-time regional seismic damage assessment framework based on long short-term 
memory neural network. Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 2021; 36(4): 504–521. DOI: 
10.1111/mice.12628. 
138. 
Chen PY, Guan X. A multi-source data-driven approach for evaluating the seismic response of non-ductile reinforced 
concrete 
moment 
frames. 
Engineering 
Structures 
2023; 
278(December 
2022): 
115452. 
DOI: 
10.1016/j.engstruct.2022.115452. 
139. 
Kang C, Kim T, Kwon OS, Song J. Deep neural network-based regional seismic loss assessment considering correlation 
between EDP residuals of building structures. Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics 2023; 52(11): 3414–
3434. DOI: 10.1002/eqe.3775. 
140. 
Li C, Li H, Chen X. Fast seismic response estimation of tall pier bridges based on deep learning techniques. Engineering 
Structures 2022; 266(June): 114566. DOI: 10.1016/j.engstruct.2022.114566. 
141. 
Noureldin M, Abuhmed T, Saygi M, Kim J. Explainable probabilistic deep learning framework for seismic assessment of 
structures using distribution-free prediction intervals. Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 2023; 38(12): 
1677–1698. DOI: 10.1111/mice.13015. 
142. 
Kim T, Song J, Kwon OS. Probabilistic evaluation of seismic responses using deep learning method. Structural Safety 

--- Sayfa 26 ---
26 
 
2020; 84(August 2019): 101913. DOI: 10.1016/j.strusafe.2019.101913. 
143. 
Su Z, Yu J, Xiao X, Wang J, Wang X. Deep learning seismic damage assessment with embedded signal denoising 
considering three-dimensional time–frequency feature correlation. Engineering Structures 2023; 286(April): 116148. DOI: 
10.1016/j.engstruct.2023.116148. 
144. 
Shen Z, Pan P, Zhang D, Huang S. Rapid Structural Safety Assessment Using a Deep Neural Network. Journal of 
Earthquake Engineering 2022; 26(5): 2625–2641. DOI: 10.1080/13632469.2020.1785586. 
145. 
Wang J, Xie Y, Guo T, Du Z. Predicting seismic interaction effect between soil and structure group using convolutional 
neural network. Structures 2023; 50(November 2022): 1011–1020. DOI: 10.1016/j.istruc.2023.02.087. 
146. 
Li J, He Z, Zhao X. A data-driven building’s seismic response estimation method using a deep convolutional neural 
network. IEEE Access 2021; 9: 50061–50077. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3065837. 
147. 
Parida SS, Bose S, Apostolakis G. Earthquake data augmentation using wavelet transform for training deep learning based 
surrogate models of nonlinear structures. Structures 2023; 55(May): 638–649. DOI: 10.1016/j.istruc.2023.05.122. 
148. 
Kim T, Kwon OS, Song J. Response prediction of nonlinear hysteretic systems by deep neural networks. Neural Networks 
2019; 111: 1–10. DOI: 10.1016/j.neunet.2018.12.005. 
149. 
Soleimani-Babakamali MH, Zaker Esteghamati M. Estimating seismic demand models of a building inventory from 
nonlinear static analysis using deep learning methods. Engineering Structures 2022; 266(July): 114576. DOI: 
10.1016/j.engstruct.2022.114576. 
150. 
Chou JY, Liu CY, Chang CM. Story drift and damage level estimation of buildings using relative acceleration responses 
with multi-target deep learning models under seismic excitation. Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics 2023; 
52(8): 2554–2571. DOI: 10.1002/eqe.3856. 
151. 
Kim M, Song J. Near-Real-Time Identification of Seismic Damage Using Unsupervised Deep Neural Network. Journal 
of Engineering Mechanics 2022; 148(3): 1–15. DOI: 10.1061/(asce)em.1943-7889.0002066. 
152. 
Kim T, Kwon OS, Song J. Deep learning-based response spectrum analysis method for building structures. Earthquake 
Engineering and Structural Dynamics 2024(January): 1–18. DOI: 10.1002/eqe.4086. 
153. 
Dang-Vu H, Nguyen QD, Chung TC, Shin J, Lee K. Frequency-based Data-driven Surrogate Model for Efficient 
Prediction of Irregular Structure’s Seismic Responses. Journal of Earthquake Engineering 2022; 26(14): 7319–7336. DOI: 
10.1080/13632469.2021.1961940. 
154. 
Sajedi S, Liang X. Filter Banks and Hybrid Deep Learning Architectures for Performance-Based Seismic Assessments of 
Bridges. Journal of Structural Engineering 2022; 148(12): 1–15. DOI: 10.1061/(asce)st.1943-541x.0003501. 
155. 
Wang J, Xie Y, Guo T, Du Z. Predicting the Influence of Soil–Structure Interaction on Seismic Responses of Reinforced 
Concrete 
Frame 
Buildings 
Using 
Convolutional 
Neural 
Network. 
Buildings 
2023; 
13(2). 
DOI: 
10.3390/buildings13020564. 
156. 
Xiong C, Zheng J, Xu L, Cen C, Zheng R, Li Y. Multiple‐input convolutional neural network model for large‐scale seismic 
damage assessment of reinforced concrete frame buildings. Applied Sciences (Switzerland) 2021; 11(17). DOI: 
10.3390/app11178258. 
157. 
Yuan X, Tanksley D, Jiao P, Li L, Chen G, Wunsch D. Encoding Time-Series Ground Motions as Images for 
Convolutional Neural Networks-Based Seismic Damage Evaluation. Frontiers in Built Environment 2021; 7(April). DOI: 
10.3389/fbuil.2021.660103. 
158. 
Yuan X, Tanksley D, Li L, Zhang H, Chen G, Wunsch D. Faster post-earthquake damage assessment based on 1d 
convolutional neural networks. Applied Sciences (Switzerland) 2021; 11(21). DOI: 10.3390/app11219844. 
159. 
Zhang W, Ghahari F, Arduino P, Taciroglu E. A deep learning approach for rapid detection of soil liquefaction using 
time–frequency images. Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering 2023; 166(July 2022): 107788. DOI: 
10.1016/j.soildyn.2023.107788. 
160. 
Zhang R, Chen Z, Chen S, Zheng J, Büyüköztürk O, Sun H. Deep long short-term memory networks for nonlinear 
structural 
seismic 
response 
prediction. 
Computers 
and 
Structures 
2019; 
220: 
55–68. 
DOI: 
10.1016/j.compstruc.2019.05.006. 
161. 
Xu Z, Chen J, Shen J, Xiang M. Recursive long short-term memory network for predicting nonlinear structural seismic 
response. Engineering Structures 2022; 250(October 2021): 113406. DOI: 10.1016/j.engstruct.2021.113406. 
162. 
Yazdanpanah O, Chang M, Park M, Kim CY. Seismic response prediction of RC bridge piers through stacked long short-
term memory network. Structures 2022; 45(September): 1990–2006. DOI: 10.1016/j.istruc.2022.10.015. 
163. 
Kundu A, Ghosh S, Chakraborty S. A long short-term memory based deep learning algorithm for seismic response 
uncertainty quantification. Probabilistic Engineering Mechanics 2022; 67(October 2021): 103189. DOI: 
10.1016/j.probengmech.2021.103189. 
164. 
Wang T, Li H, Noori M, Ghiasi R, Kuok SC. Probabilistic Seismic Response Prediction of Three-Dimensional Structures 
Based on Bayesian Convolutional Neural Network. Sensors 2022(22): 3775. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-94514-5_3. 

--- Sayfa 27 ---
27 
 
165. 
Pan Y, Ventura CE, Li T. Sensor placement and seismic response reconstruction for structural health monitoring using a 
deep neural network. Bulletin of Earthquake Engineering 2022; 20(9): 4513–4532. DOI: 10.1007/s10518-021-01266-y. 
166. 
Xu Y, Lu X, Fei Y, Huang Y. Iterative self-transfer learning: A general methodology for response time-history prediction 
based on small dataset. Journal of Computational Design and Engineering 2022; 9(5): 2089–2102. DOI: 
10.1093/jcde/qwac098. 
167. 
Yi R, Li X, Zhu S, Li Y, Xu X. A deep leaning method for dynamic vibration analysis of bridges subjected to uniform 
seismic 
excitation. 
Soil 
Dynamics 
and 
Earthquake 
Engineering 
2023; 
168(January): 
107830. 
DOI: 
10.1016/j.soildyn.2023.107830. 
168. 
Eltouny KA, Liang X. Uncertainty-aware structural damage warning system using deep variational composite neural 
networks. Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics 2023; 52(11): 3345–3368. DOI: 10.1002/eqe.3892. 
169. 
Taghavi Ganji H, Seylabi E. An LSTM RNN proposal for surrogate modeling the dynamic response of buried structures 
to earthquake plane waves in soil half-spaces. Computers and Geotechnics 2023; 164(April): 105796. DOI: 
10.1016/j.compgeo.2023.105796. 
170. 
Guo J, Enokida R, Li D, Ikago K. Combination of physics-based and data-driven modeling for nonlinear structural seismic 
response prediction through deep residual learning. Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics 2023; 52(8): 2429–
2451. DOI: 10.1002/eqe.3863. 
171. 
Kim M, Song J. Seismic damage identification by graph convolutional autoencoder using adjacency matrix based on 
structural modes. Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics 2023(October 2023): 815–837. DOI: 
10.1002/eqe.4047. 
172. 
Wu Y, Yin Z, Zhang H, Geng W. Prediction of nonlinear seismic response of underground structures in single- and multi-
layered soil profiles using a deep gated recurrent network. Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering 2023; 168(July 
2022): 107852. DOI: 10.1016/j.soildyn.2023.107852. 
173. 
Xiong Q, Kong Q, Xiong H, Liao L, Yuan C. Physics-informed deep 1D CNN compiled in extended state space fusion 
for seismic response modeling. Computers & Structures 2024; 291: 107215. DOI: 10.1016/j.compstruc.2023.107215. 
174. 
Huang P, Chen Z, Liu Z. Nonparametric probabilistic seismic demand model and fragility analysis of subway stations 
using deep learning techniques. Underground Space (China) 2023; 11: 63–80. DOI: 10.1016/j.undsp.2022.10.009. 
175. 
Wang J, Jiang Y, Huang Q, Guan X, Dai K. An adapted LSTM-DRRNet approach for predicting floor acceleration 
response spectrum. Engineering Structures 2023; 295(April): 116849. DOI: 10.1016/j.engstruct.2023.116849. 
176. 
Xiang P, Zhang P, Zhao H, Shao Z, Jiang L. Seismic response prediction of a train-bridge coupled system based on a 
LSTM neural network. Mechanics Based Design of Structures and Machines 2023; 0(0): 1–23. DOI: 
10.1080/15397734.2023.2260469. 
177. 
Liao Y, Lin R, Zhang R, Wu G. Attention-based LSTM (AttLSTM) neural network for Seismic Response Modeling of 
Bridges. Computers and Structures 2023; 275: 106915. DOI: 10.1016/j.compstruc.2022.106915. 
178. 
Liu F, Li J, Wang L. PI-LSTM: Physics-informed long short-term memory network for structural response modeling. 
Engineering Structures 2023; 292(April 2022): 116500. DOI: 10.1016/j.engstruct.2023.116500. 
179. 
Wang T, Li H, Noori M, Ghiasi R, Kuok SC, Altabey WA. Seismic response prediction of structures based on Runge-
Kutta recurrent neural network with prior knowledge. Engineering Structures 2023; 279: 115576. DOI: 
10.1016/j.engstruct.2022.115576. 
180. 
Zhong Z, Ni B, Shi Y, Shen J, Du X. Convolutional neural network-based seismic fragility analysis of subway station 
structure considering spatial variation of site shear-wave velocity. Computers and Geotechnics 2023; 163(August). DOI: 
10.1016/j.compgeo.2023.105741. 
181. 
Maharjan S, Guidio B, Jeong C. Convolutional neural network for identifying effective seismic force at a DRM layer for 
rapid reconstruction of SH ground motions. Earthquake Engineering & Structural Dynamics 2023(August): 1–30. DOI: 
10.1002/eqe.4049. 
182. 
Peng H, Yan J, Yu Y, Luo Y. Time series estimation based on deep Learning for structural dynamic nonlinear prediction. 
Structures 2021; 29(November 2020): 1016–1031. DOI: 10.1016/j.istruc.2020.11.049. 
183. 
Zhou Y, Meng S, Lou Y, Kong Q. Physics-Informed Deep Learning-Based Real-Time Structural Response Prediction 
Method. Engineering 2023. DOI: 10.1016/j.eng.2023.08.011. 
184. 
Gao X, Ji X, Zhang Y, Zhuang Y, Cai E. Structural displacement estimation by a hybrid computer vision approach. 
Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 2023; 204(April): 110754. DOI: 10.1016/j.ymssp.2023.110754. 
185. 
Meng S, Zhou Y, Gao Z. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence Refined self-attention mechanism based real-
time structural response prediction method under seismic action. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 2024; 
129(July 2022): 107380. DOI: 10.1016/j.engappai.2023.107380. 
186. 
Fan G, Li J, Hao H, Xin Y. Data driven structural dynamic response reconstruction using segment based generative 
adversarial networks. Engineering Structures 2021; 234(January): 111970. DOI: 10.1016/j.engstruct.2021.111970. 
187. 
Sadeghi Eshkevari S, Takáč M, Pakzad SN, Jahani M. DynNet: Physics-based neural architecture design for nonlinear 

--- Sayfa 28 ---
28 
 
structural response modeling and prediction. Engineering Structures 2021; 229(November 2020). DOI: 
10.1016/j.engstruct.2020.111582. 
188. 
Oh BK, Park Y, Park HS. Seismic response prediction method for building structures using convolutional neural network. 
Structural Control and Health Monitoring 2020; 27(5): 1–17. DOI: 10.1002/stc.2519. 
189. 
Zhang R, Liu Y, Sun H. Physics-guided convolutional neural network (PhyCNN) for data-driven seismic response 
modeling. Engineering Structures 2020; 215(February): 110704. DOI: 10.1016/j.engstruct.2020.110704. 
190. 
Zhang R, Liu Y, Sun H. Physics-informed multi-LSTM networks for metamodeling of nonlinear structures. Computer 
Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 2020; 369: 113226. DOI: 10.1016/j.cma.2020.113226. 
191. 
Wu RT, Jahanshahi MR. Deep Convolutional Neural Network for Structural Dynamic Response Estimation and System 
Identification. Journal of Engineering Mechanics 2019; 145(1). DOI: 10.1061/(asce)em.1943-7889.0001556. 
192. 
He S, Liao Y, Sun PP, Zhang R. Deep learning enabled seismic fragility evaluation of structures subjected to mainshock 
‑ aftershock earthquakes. Urban Lifeline 2024. DOI: 10.1007/s44285-024-00013-4. 
193. 
Mekaoui N, Hada S, Saito T. Deep learning model for prediction of non-linear cyclic hysteresis of seismic isolation devices: 
Full-scale experimental validation. Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering 2023; 169(March): 107873. DOI: 
10.1016/j.soildyn.2023.107873. 
194. 
Kim HS. Development of seismic response simulation model for building structures with semi-active control devices using 
recurrent neural network. Applied Sciences (Switzerland) 2020; 10(11). DOI: 10.3390/app10113915. 
195. 
Chen Z, Wang N, Sun H. Graph oscillators: Physics-guided graph modeling of mass–spring–damper systems for trajectory 
prediction and damage localization. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 2024; 212(February): 111297. DOI: 
10.1016/j.ymssp.2024.111297. 
196. 
Seon Park H, Hwan An J, Jun Park Y, Kwan Oh B. Convolutional neural network-based safety evaluation method for 
structures 
with 
dynamic 
responses. 
Expert 
Systems 
with 
Applications 
2020; 
158: 
113634. 
DOI: 
10.1016/j.eswa.2020.113634. 
197. 
Huang Y, Han X, Zhao L. Recurrent neural networks for complicated seismic dynamic response prediction of a slope 
system. Engineering Geology 2021; 289(May): 106198. DOI: 10.1016/j.enggeo.2021.106198. 
198. 
Torky AA, Ohno S. Deep learning techniques for predicting nonlinear multi-component seismic responses of structural 
buildings. Computers and Structures 2021; 252: 106570. DOI: 10.1016/j.compstruc.2021.106570. 
199. 
Li T, Pan Y, Tong K, Ventura CE, De Silva CW. Attention-Based Sequence-to-Sequence Learning for Online Structural 
Response Forecasting under Seismic Excitation. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems 2022; 
52(4): 2184–2200. DOI: 10.1109/TSMC.2020.3048696. 
200. 
Ning C, Xie Y, Sun L. LSTM, WaveNet, and 2D CNN for nonlinear time history prediction of seismic responses. 
Engineering Structures 2023; 286(April): 116083. DOI: 10.1016/j.engstruct.2023.116083. 
201. 
Du A, Wang X, Xie Y, Dong Y. Regional seismic risk and resilience assessment : Methodological development , 
applicability , and future research needs – An earthquake engineering perspective 2023; 233(July 2021). 
202. 
Koliou M, van de Lindt JW, McAllister TP, Ellingwood BR, Dillard M, Cutler H. State of the research in community 
resilience: Progress and challenges. Sustainable and Resilient Infrastructure 2020; 5(3): 131–151. DOI: 
10.1080/23789689.2017.1418547. 
203. 
Yang S, Zhang Y, Lu X, Guo W, Miao H. Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning based decision support model for 
resilient community post-hazard recovery. Reliability Engineering and System Safety 2024; 242(April 2023): 109754. DOI: 
10.1016/j.ress.2023.109754. 
204. 
Ali G, Zhang X. Deep reinforcement learning for intelligent risk optimization of buildings under hazard. Reliability 
Engineering and System Safety 2024; 247(February): 110118. DOI: 10.1016/j.ress.2024.110118. 
205. 
Nabian MA, Meidani H. Deep Learning for Accelerated Seismic Reliability Analysis of Transportation Networks. 
Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 2018; 33(6): 443–458. DOI: 10.1111/mice.12359. 
206. 
Kim T, Song J, Kwon OS. Pre- and post-earthquake regional loss assessment using deep learning. Earthquake Engineering 
and Structural Dynamics 2020; 49(7): 657–678. DOI: 10.1002/eqe.3258. 
207. 
Jena R, Naik SP, Pradhan B, Beydoun G, Park HJ, Alamri A. Earthquake vulnerability assessment for the Indian 
subcontinent using the Long Short-Term Memory model (LSTM). International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 2021; 
66(October). DOI: 10.1016/j.ijdrr.2021.102642. 
208. 
Jena R, Pradhan B, Naik SP, Alamri AM. Earthquake risk assessment in NE India using deep learning and geospatial 
analysis. Geoscience Frontiers 2021; 12(3): 101110. DOI: 10.1016/j.gsf.2020.11.007. 
209. 
Silva-Lopez R, Baker JW, Poulos A. Deep Learning–Based Retrofitting and Seismic Risk Assessment of Road Networks. 
Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering 2022; 36(2): 1–12. DOI: 10.1061/(asce)cp.1943-5487.0001006. 
210. 
Jena R, Shanableh A, Al-Ruzouq R, Pradhan B, Gibril MBA, Ghorbanzadeh O, et al. An Integration of Deep Learning 
and Transfer Learning for Earthquake-Risk Assessment in the Eurasian Region. Remote Sensing 2023; 15(15). DOI: 

--- Sayfa 29 ---
29 
 
10.3390/rs15153759. 
211. 
Dupuis M, Schill C, Lee R, Bradley B. A deep-learning-based model for quality assessment of earthquake-induced ground-
motion records. Earthquake Spectra 2023(February). DOI: 10.1177/87552930231195113. 
212. 
Zhao G, Xu L, Zhu X, Lin S, Xie L. Spectrum-matched ground motion selection method based on Siamese Convolutional 
Neural 
Networks. 
Soil 
Dynamics 
and 
Earthquake 
Engineering 
2022; 
163(September): 
107515. 
DOI: 
10.1016/j.soildyn.2022.107515. 
213. 
Matinfar M, Khaji N, Ahmadi G. Deep convolutional generative adversarial networks for the generation of numerous 
artificial spectrum-compatible earthquake accelerograms using a limited number of ground motion records. Computer-
Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 2023; 38(2): 225–240. DOI: 10.1111/mice.12852. 
214. 
Bond RB, Ren P, Hajjar JF, Sun H. An unsupervised machine learning approach for ground-motion spectra clustering and 
selection. Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics 2024; 53(3): 1107–1124. DOI: 10.1002/eqe.4062. 
215. 
Ding Y, Chen J, Shen J. Prediction of spectral accelerations of aftershock ground motion with deep learning method. Soil 
Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering 2021; 150(June 2020): 106951. DOI: 10.1016/j.soildyn.2021.106951. 
216. 
Fayaz J, Galasso C. A Generalized Ground Motion Model for consistent Mainshock-Aftershock Ground Motion Intensity 
Measures using Deep Neural Networks. 12th National Conference on Earthquake Engineering, NCEE 2022 2022(July). 
217. 
Na Y, El-Tawil S, Ibrahim A, Eltawil A. Stick-Slip Classification Based on Machine Learning Techniques for Building 
Damage 
Assessment. 
Journal 
of 
Earthquake 
Engineering 
2022; 
26(11): 
5848–5865. 
DOI: 
10.1080/13632469.2021.1891156. 
218. 
He YA, Wu J. Control of structural seismic response by self-recurrent neural network (SRNN). Earthquake Engineering 
and 
Structural 
Dynamics 
1998; 
27(7): 
641–648. 
DOI: 
10.1002/(SICI)1096-9845(199807)27:7<641::AID-
EQE741>3.0.CO;2-D. 
219. 
Zhang H, Wang L, Shi W. Seismic control of adaptive variable stiffness intelligent structures using fuzzy control strategy 
combined with LSTM. Journal of Building Engineering 2023; 78(August): 107549. DOI: 10.1016/j.jobe.2023.107549. 
220. 
Radmard Rahmani H, Chase G, Wiering M, Könke C. A framework for brain learning-based control of smart structures. 
Advanced Engineering Informatics 2019; 42(May): 100986. DOI: 10.1016/j.aei.2019.100986. 
221. 
Armand GM, Shirai K. Determination of optimum friction damper sliding force in vibration control using deep 
reinforcement learning. 17th World Conference on Earthquake Engineering (17WCEE), Sendai, Japan, 2021. 
222. 
Wang Z, Ubertini F, Laflamme S. Ensemble of long short-term memory recurrent neural network for semi-active control 
of tuned liquid wall damper. Engineering Structures 2022; 270(July): 114771. DOI: 10.1016/j.engstruct.2022.114771. 
223. 
Li Z, Tu J, Zhang J. Seismic response of high-rise buildings using long short-term memory intelligent decentralized control 
system. JVC/Journal of Vibration and Control 2023; 29(9–10): 1981–1995. DOI: 10.1177/10775463221074478. 
224. 
Lin TK, Lu LY, Chuang CK, Lin TK. Development and Experimental Verification of an Intelligent Isolation System 
Based on Long Short-Term Memory Module Model for Ground Motion Characteristics Prediction. Structural Control and 
Health Monitoring 2023; 10(1): STR-83-1-STR-83-6. DOI: 10.14455/ISEC.2023.10(1).STR-83. 
225. 
Liu H, Zhang Y. Deep learning-based brace damage detection for concentrically braced frame structures under seismic 
loadings. Advances in Structural Engineering 2019; 22(16): 3473–3486. DOI: 10.1177/1369433219859389. 
226. 
Impraimakis M. A convolutional neural network deep learning method for model class selection. Earthquake Engineering 
and Structural Dynamics 2023(June): 1–31. DOI: 10.1002/eqe.4045. 
227. 
Zeng Y, He Z, Pan P. A deep learning method to monitor axial pressure and shear deformation of rubber bearings under 
coupled compression and shear loading. Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics 2023; 52(11): 3304–3321. 
DOI: 10.1002/eqe.3895. 
228. 
Zhou C, Chase JG, Rodgers GW. Degradation evaluation of lateral story stiffness using HLA-based deep learning 
networks. Advanced Engineering Informatics 2019; 39(September 2018): 259–268. DOI: 10.1016/j.aei.2019.01.007. 
229. 
Yu Y, Wang C, Gu X, Li J. A novel deep learning-based method for damage identification of smart building structures. 
Structural Health Monitoring 2019; 18(1): 143–163. DOI: 10.1177/1475921718804132. 
230. 
Khodabandehlou H, Pekcan G, Fadali MS. Vibration-based structural condition assessment using convolution neural 
networks. Structural Control and Health Monitoring 2019; 26(2): 1–12. DOI: 10.1002/stc.2308. 
231. 
Lei Y, Zhang Y, Mi J, Liu W, Liu L. Detecting structural damage under unknown seismic excitation by deep convolutional 
neural network with wavelet-based transmissibility data. Structural Health Monitoring 2021; 20(4): 1583–1596. DOI: 
10.1177/1475921720923081. 
232. 
Gao Y, Mosalam KM. PEER Hub ImageNet: A Large-Scale Multiattribute Benchmark Data Set of Structural Images. 
Journal of Structural Engineering 2020; 146(10): 1–13. DOI: 10.1061/(asce)st.1943-541x.0002745. 
233. 
Sohl-Dickstein J, Weiss EA, Maheswaranathan N, Ganguli S. Deep unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium 
thermodynamics. 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2015 2015; 3: 2246–2255. 
234. 
Niu Z, Zhong G, Yu H. A review on the attention mechanism of deep learning. Neurocomputing 2021; 452: 48–62. DOI: 

--- Sayfa 30 ---
30 
 
10.1016/j.neucom.2021.03.091. 
235. 
Ganaie MA, Hu M, Malik AK, Tanveer M, Suganthan PN. Ensemble deep learning: A review. Engineering Applications 
of Artificial Intelligence 2022; 115(June): 105151. DOI: 10.1016/j.engappai.2022.105151. 
236. 
Liu X, Zhang F, Hou Z, Mian L, Wang Z, Zhang J, et al. Self-Supervised Learning: Generative or Contrastive. IEEE 
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 2023; 35(1): 857–876. DOI: 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3090866. 
237. 
Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, Uszkoreit J, Jones L, Gomez AN, et al. Attention Is All You Need. 31st Conference on 
Neural Information Processing Systems 2017: 1–11. DOI: 10.1145/3583780.3615497. 
238. 
Simonyan K, Vedaldi A, Zisserman A. Deep inside convolutional networks: Visualising image classification models and 
saliency maps. 2nd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014 - Workshop Track Proceedings 
2014: 1–8. 
239. 
Sundararajan M, Taly A, Yan Q. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. 34th International Conference on Machine 
Learning, ICML 2017 2017; 7: 5109–5118. 
240. 
Springenberg JT, Dosovitskiy A, Brox T, Riedmiller M. Striving for simplicity: The all convolutional net. 3rd 
International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015 - Workshop Track Proceedings 2015: 1–14. 
241. 
Kim B, Wattenberg M, Gilmer J, Cai C, Wexler J, Viegas F, et al. Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quantitative 
Testing with Concept Activation Vectors (TCAV). 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018 2018; 
6: 4186–4195. 
242. 
Zeiler MD, Fergus R. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 
(Including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 2014; 8689 
LNCS(PART 1): 818–833. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-10590-1_53. 
243. 
Zhou B, Khosla A, Lepedriza A, Oliva A, Torralba A. Learning deep features for discriminative localization. Proceedings 
of 
the 
IEEE 
Conference 
on 
Computer 
Vision 
and 
Pattern 
Recognition 
2016: 
2921–2929. 
DOI: 
10.5465/ambpp.2004.13862426. 
244. 
Bach S, Binder A, Montavon G, Klauschen F, Müller KR, Samek W. On pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classifier 
decisions by layer-wise relevance propagation. PLoS ONE 2015; 10(7): 1–46. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130140. 
 
