
--- Sayfa 1 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXX 2025
1
A Deep Learning Approach for Spatio-Temporal
Forecasting of InSAR Ground Deformation in
Eastern Ireland
Wendong Yao, Saeed Azadnejad, Binhua Huang, Shane Donohue, and Soumyabrata Dev, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Monitoring ground displacement is crucial for ur-
ban infrastructure stability and mitigating geological hazards.
However, forecasting future deformation from sparse Interfer-
ometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) time-series data
remains a significant challenge. This paper introduces a novel
deep learning framework that transforms these sparse point
measurements into a dense spatio-temporal tensor. This method-
ological shift allows, for the first time, the direct application of
advanced computer vision architectures to this forecasting prob-
lem. We design and implement a hybrid Convolutional Neural
Network and Long-Short Term Memory (CNN-LSTM) model,
specifically engineered to simultaneously learn spatial patterns
and temporal dependencies from the generated data tensor. The
model’s performance is benchmarked against powerful machine
learning baselines, Light Gradient Boosting Machine and LASSO
regression, using Sentinel-1 data from eastern Ireland. Results
demonstrate that the proposed architecture provides significantly
more accurate and spatially coherent forecasts, establishing a
new performance benchmark for this task. Furthermore, an
interpretability analysis reveals that baseline models often default
to simplistic persistence patterns, highlighting the necessity of
our integrated spatio-temporal approach to capture the complex
dynamics of ground deformation. Our findings confirm the
efficacy and potential of spatio-temporal deep learning for high-
resolution deformation forecasting.
Index Terms—Ground Displacement, Spatio-Temporal Predic-
tion, InSAR, Sentinel-1, Deep Learning
I. INTRODUCTION
Ground movement in rapidly growing urban areas is a
critical concern because it can compromise the integrity of
civil infrastructure and buildings, posing significant risks to
public safety and economic stability. While this movement can
be triggered by various factors, significant ground deformation
is often linked to subsurface changes, such as groundwater
extraction or tunneling, which can induce widespread subsi-
dence. In other cases, localized settlement may result from
large-scale construction, particularly on soft, compressible
soils. Given these potential impacts, monitoring and accurately
forecasting ground deformation is essential for urban planning,
risk mitigation, and ensuring the long-term resilience of critical
Manuscript received September XX, 2025; revised September XX, 2025;
accepted September XX, 2025.
In
the
spirit
of
reproducible
research,
all
the
code
and
dataset
used
in
this
paper
can
be
accessed
here:
Wen-
dong˙2025˙Spatiotemporal˙InSAR˙dataset˙prediction
W. Yao and S. Dev are with ADAPT SFI Research Centre, School of
Computer Science, University College Dublin, Ireland.
S. Azadnejad and S. Donohue are with the School of Civil Engineering,
University College Dublin, Ireland.
Send correspondence to S. Dev, e-mail: soumyabrata.dev@ucd.ie.
infrastructure. This highlights the need to monitor and analyze
ground motion in urban settings [1]. As noted in [2], moni-
toring ground displacement is vital for evaluating landslides,
which occur worldwide and can pose a considerable risk to life
and critical infrastructure [3]. Furthermore, such deformation
affects energy systems, as stable ground conditions are crucial
to the safe and efficient function of key energy infrastructures,
such as power plants, energy storage systems, and distribution
networks. Numerous studies have concentrated on the analysis
of deformation in urban areas, including efforts to understand
the effect of movement of the ground on the planning, oper-
ation and resilience of the energy infrastructure [4]–[6].
Various techniques have been used to monitor ground
displacement, with interferometric synthetic aperture radar
(InSAR) systems delivering significant results [7]. This system
facilitates the creation of precise time series data for ground
deformation [8], [9]. In the realm of remote sensing, machine
learning technology is widely applied and has demonstrated
substantial effectiveness in recognition and estimation pro-
cessing tasks [10], [11]. Numerous studies have explored time
series estimation of ground displacement, predominantly using
machine learning models on datasets generated by InSAR,
such as in [12] and [13]. However, fewer investigations have
focused on the spatial estimation of derived InSAR data sets.
While existing studies have successfully applied machine
learning to InSAR datasets, they often treat the prediction as
a purely temporal or spatial problem, failing to fully capture
the complex interplay between the two domains. In a foun-
dational study [14], we explored a purely spatial prediction
approach, establishing a methodological framework for feature
evaluation. However, that analysis revealed a key limitation:
while certain spatial features like acceleration were significant,
the model’s performance was ultimately constrained by the
absence of temporal dynamics, achieving a modest estimation
accuracy of 69.7%. This finding underscored that a more ac-
curate forecast requires the integration of both spatial patterns
and their temporal evolution. This gap motivates our current
work, where we develop a dedicated spatio-temporal deep
learning model to overcome the limitations of a purely spatial
approach.
To achieve this, we introduce a new methodology founded
on a regenerated spatio-temporal dataset and a bespoke hybrid
deep learning model. This paper details this approach and its
evaluation. The main contributions are:
1) Methodological Innovation for InSAR Time-Series
Analysis: We introduce a novel end-to-end frame-
arXiv:2509.18176v1  [cs.CV]  17 Sep 2025

--- Sayfa 2 ---
work that transforms sparse, point-based InSAR mea-
surements into a dense spatio-temporal tensor format.
This methodological shift enables, for the first time in
this context, the direct application of advanced spatio-
temporal deep learning architectures for ground defor-
mation forecasting, moving beyond traditional point-
wise or purely spatial analyses.
2) Demonstration of a Hybrid Deep Learning Architec-
ture for Spatio-Temporal Forecasting: We design and
validate a hybrid CNN-LSTM model, demonstrating the
power of architectures that explicitly and simultaneously
learn both spatial patterns and temporal dependencies
from InSAR data. Our results show that this integrated
approach significantly outperforms powerful machine
learning baselines that do not model the spatio-temporal
structure, establishing a new performance benchmark for
this prediction task.
3) Enhancing Model Interpretability in a Geospatial
Context: We apply SHAP analysis to provide insights
into the decision-making process of a high-performing
baseline model (LightGBM). This analysis not only
reveals the limitations of simpler autoregressive patterns
but also highlights the necessity of the more complex
feature learning captured by our proposed deep learning
model, thereby contributing to the broader effort of
building more transparent and trustworthy AI models
in the remote sensing domain.
II. STUDY AREA AND DATASET DESCRIPTION
Our study focuses on an area in eastern Ireland, specifically
at the coordinates Easting = 32 and Northing = 34. We utilized
the European Ground Motion Service (EGMS) ’Level-3 2018-
2022’ vector dataset, which provides annual updates through-
out Europe. This dataset is derived from Copernicus Sentinel-1
satellite data and measures ground movements, incorporating
results within the data set. Data generation employs persistent
and distributed scatterer radar interferometry for time series
analysis [15]. Figure. 1 illustrates data from a particular
geographical location, capturing essential parameters such as
velocity, root mean square error (RMSE), and displacement.
The dataset we obtained provides ground displacement
values in millimeters for each geographic point it records.
The locations are logged using the ETRS89-LAEA standard
[8]. For our study area, coordinates are captured at 100-meter
intervals, covering shifts both eastward and northward. The
displacement variation of each point is tracked. From January
2018 to December 2022, displacement values for each point
were recorded every 6 days.
The dataset is used by taking the final displacement value
recorded as the target. The model is trained using time series
data on the ground displacement at a specific location and
produces an estimate of the displacement value on the last
recorded day.
We used an Ortho-leveled dataset from EGMS, which
includes measurements of vertical and horizontal displace-
ments, specifically from East to West. These measurements
are derived from calibrated data and resampled onto a regular
grid with cells measuring 100 by 100 meters [8]. Our study
uses data from 2018 to 2022.1.
III. METHODOLOGY
In this section, we will introduce the methodology we used
to generate our dataset and the machine learning models we
applied to it. A detailed graph of workflow is shown in Fig-
ure. 2. Details of the workflow, including the data generation
process, the machine learning model training process, and
the performance assessment process, will be discussed in the
following subsections.
Our training data are generated from the EGMS dataset into
maps for displacement. Detailed data generation process will
be introduced in Section. III-A.
For model training and assessment, we generated a CNN-
LSTM model with spatiotemporal attention mechanisms. We
also used the LightGBM model, which also showed good
performance on similar tasks [16], for comparison. The train-
ing and testing pipeline framework will be introduced in
Section. III-C.
For performance comparison, we used parameters similar
to those in previous research, to compare our models’ per-
formance. Scatter plot, residual plot and residual boxplot are
generated to clearly reveal the performance of the models.
We also used the results to generate a ”displacement map”,
showing the predicted deformation in the region. We also
compared the predicted displacement map and the actual
displacement map to clearly see the difference. Performance
comparison will be introduced in Section. III-D.
Algorithm. 1 shows in detail how the experiment is per-
formed, and Table. I describes the variables shown in the
algorithm.
A. Data generation
Our methodology for spatio-temporal prediction of ground
displacement begins with a significant data preprocessing
stage. The raw EGMS dataset provides displacement values
for a set of sparsely distributed Measurement Points (MPs),
each identified by its ’northing’ and ’easting’ coordinates. For
each MP, the dataset includes a time series of 300 displacement
measurements recorded between 2018 and 2022.
To prepare these data for a deep learning model capable of
capturing both spatial and temporal patterns, we transform the
sparse point data into a dense, gridded, spatio-temporal format.
This process involves creating a sequence of ’displacement
maps’. For each of the 300 time steps, we generate a 2D
displacement map by interpolating the displacement values
from the irregularly spaced MPs onto a regular 256x256 grid.
We employ linear interpolation for this task to estimate the
displacement at each grid cell. Any resulting Not-a-Number
(NaN) values, which may occur at grid points outside the
convex hull of the original MPs, are replaced with zero.
The choice of the spatial resolution for the interpolated
displacement maps is a critical parameter that balances the
1The EGMS dataset is available for download at: https://egms.land.
copernicus.eu/

--- Sayfa 3 ---
Algorithm 1 Spatio-Temporal InSAR Deformation Forecasting and Analysis Pipeline
Require: Draw: Raw Sentinel-1 measurement data as a CSV file, containing columns for Easting, Northing, and displacement time series.
1: Tin ←300: Number of input time steps for training (columns 11 to 311).
2: Tout: The target time step for prediction (column 313).
3: H, W ←256, 256: The spatial resolution of the output grid.
4: M ←{MCNN-LSTM, MLGBM, MLasso}: Set of machine learning models for comparison.
Ensure: { ˆYm}m∈M: Predicted displacement maps for each model.
5: {RMSEm, R2
m}m∈M: Performance metrics (RMSE, R²) for each model.
6: ΦLGBM: SHAP values for interpreting the LightGBM model.
7: Part 1: Spatio-Temporal Data Gridding
8: Let p ←(Easting, Northing) be the coordinates of measurement points from Draw.
9: Define a regular grid G of size H × W spanning the extent of p.
10: Initialize an empty tensor for input features X ∈RTin×H×W .
11: for t = 1, . . . , Tin do
12:
Let vt be the displacement values at time t from Draw.
13:
Interpolate sparse data (p, vt) onto the grid G to create a dense map Xt. ▷Using ‘scipy.interpolate.griddata‘ with ’linear’ method
14:
Handle missing values in Xt by replacing NaN with zero.
15:
X[t −1, :, :] ←Xt.
16: end for
17: Let vtarget be the displacement values at time Tout.
18: Interpolate (p, vtarget) onto G to create the ground truth map Ytrue ∈RH×W .
19: Part 2: Model Training and Prediction
20: for each model Mi in M do
21:
if Mi is MCNN-LSTM then
22:
Reshape input to X5D ∈R1×Tin×1×H×W .
▷Batch, Time, Channel, Height, Width
23:
Train MCNN-LSTM on (X5D, Ytrue) using MSE loss.
24:
Predict ˆYCNN-LSTM ←MCNN-LSTM(X5D).
25:
else if Mi is MLGBM or MLasso then
26:
Reshape input X to a tabular matrix Xtable ∈R(H·W )×Tin.
▷Each row is a pixel’s time series
27:
Reshape target Ytrue to a vector ytrue ∈RH·W .
28:
if Mi is MLGBM then
29:
Split (Xtable, ytrue) into training and validation sets.
30:
Train MLGBM with early stopping.
31:
Predict on the full dataset: ˆyLGBM ←MLGBM(Xtable).
32:
Reshape prediction back to a map: ˆYLGBM ∈RH×W .
33:
else if Mi is MLasso then
34:
Standardize features Xtable and target ytrue.
35:
Train MLasso by optimizing MSE + L1 regularization loss.
36:
Predict on the full dataset and inverse-transform to get ˆyLasso.
37:
Reshape prediction back to a map: ˆYLasso ∈RH×W .
38:
end if
39:
end if
40: end for
41: Part 3: Performance Assessment and Interpretation
42: for each model prediction ˆYm do
43:
Compute pixel-wise metrics: RMSEm ←
q
MSE(Ytrue, ˆYm).
44:
Compute coefficient of determination: R2
m ←R2(Ytrue, ˆYm).
45:
Generate and save comparison plots of Ytrue versus ˆYm.
46: end for
47: SHAP Analysis for LightGBM
48: Initialize explainer: E ←shap.TreeExplainer(MLGBM).
49: Compute SHAP values ΦLGBM on a subset of the test data.
50: Generate and save global feature importance summary plot.
51: Generate and save local prediction force plot for a sample pixel.

--- Sayfa 4 ---
-20
-10
0
10
20
Displacement mm
20180106
20180418
20180723
20181102
20190212
20190519
20190829
20191209
20200320
20200630
20201004
20210114
20210426
20210731
20211110
20220220
20220527
20220906
20221211
Measurement date
1. Vertical: 40gT02Qr5u
Dataset:
Point ID:
Position:
Mean velocity:
RMSE:
Vertical
40gT02Qr5u
3482150.00 N 3195450.00 E 74.70 m
-1.50 mm/year
2.00 mm
Fig. 1: Example of how EGMS presents data for a single geographical point [15]
fidelity of spatial features against computational resource re-
quirements. To determine an optimal resolution, we conducted
a comparative analysis of three candidate grid sizes: 128x128,
256x256, and 512x512. The results, including a visual compar-
ison and the corresponding GPU memory (VRAM) footprint
for a full input tensor ([1, 300, 1, H, W]), are presented in
Figure. 3.
Our analysis revealed the following:
1) At 128x128 resolution, there is a noticeable loss of
fine-grained spatial detail, with key deformation features
appearing pixelated and less distinct. While its VRAM
requirement of 18.75 MB is minimal, the sacrifice in
data quality was deemed too significant.
2) At 512x512 resolution, while there is a marginal increase
in visual sharpness compared to 256x256, the compu-
tational cost increases disproportionately. The VRAM
footprint rises four-fold to 300.00 MB. This substantial
memory demand would severely limit model complexity
and batch size, making extensive training and hyperpa-
rameter tuning impractical.
3) The 256x256 resolution emerges as the optimal compro-
mise. As shown in the figure, it captures the essential
spatial patterns of ground deformation with high fidelity,
showing clear improvements over the 128x128 grid.
Crucially, it achieves this quality with a manageable
VRAM footprint of 76.00 MB.
Therefore, we selected the 256x256 resolution for all sub-
sequent experiments. This choice ensures that our model
is trained on data that is both rich in spatial detail and
computationally feasible, enabling efficient and stable training.
The result of this procedure is a stack of 300 sequential
displacement maps that form a single data sample with dimen-
sions corresponding to time, height, and width. This spatio-
temporal tensor allows our model not only to analyze the
time series evolution of displacement at each location but also
to learn from the spatial relationships between adjacent grid
cells at any given time step. The target displacement map for
prediction is generated using the same interpolation process
as used for the final recorded displacement values.
B. Framework for Single-Step-Ahead Forecasting
Our study is designed as a single-step-ahead forecasting
task, where the model learns from a sequence of 300 historical
displacement maps to predict the map at the single, subsequent
time step. This specific framework was intentionally chosen
for several key reasons.
Firstly, it establishes a clear and rigorous benchmark for
evaluating the core spatio-temporal learning capabilities of
the proposed CNN-LSTM architecture against the baseline
models. By focusing on the most immediate future state,
we can directly assess the model’s ability to extrapolate
from the learned historical dynamics without introducing the
additional complexities of long-term forecasting, such as the
accumulation of errors.
Secondly, this approach allows us to isolate the primary
variable of interest in this study: the effectiveness of different
model architectures in capturing spatio-temporal dependen-
cies. While multi-step forecasting is an important avenue for
future research, a single-step framework provides a more con-
trolled environment to validate the fundamental premise of our
paper—that an integrated spatio-temporal model is superior to

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Fig. 2: Workflow of our methodology, including data generation, model training and performance assessment
128x128
VRAM: 18.75 MB
256x256
VRAM: 76.00 MB
512x512
VRAM: 300.00 MB
displacement map comparison in different resolution and VRAM usage
Fig. 3: Visual and computational comparison of different
spatial resolutions. Displacement maps are shown for grid
sizes of (a) 128x128, (b) 256x256, and (c) 512x512. The
VRAM indicates the estimated memory required to load a full
training tensor at each resolution, demonstrating the trade-off
between image detail and computational demand.
models that do not explicitly handle both domains. Therefore,
predicting the final time step serves as the foundational test of
our proposed method’s capabilities.
C. Machine Learning Models for Deformation Forecasting
To predict future ground displacement, we employ and
compare three different machine learning models. Each model
approaches the spatio-temporal forecasting problem with a
different architectural philosophy. We propose a bespoke deep
learning model, CNN-LSTM, which is designed to learn from
both spatial and temporal patterns simultaneously. For compar-
ison, we benchmark its performance against two powerful and
widely-used regression models: LightGBM and Lasso Regres-
sion. These models treat the problem as a high-dimensional
regression task, where each pixel time series is an independent
sample. The specifics of each model are detailed below.
1) CNN-LSTM: The Convolutional Neural Network Long-
Short Term Memory (CNN-LSTM) model is a deep
learning architecture specifically designed to capture
intertwined spatial and temporal dependencies. Our im-
plementation processes the input data, structured as a
sequence of Tin displacement maps (a 5D tensor X5D of
shape [1, Tin, 1, H, W]), through two main stages:
• Spatial Feature Extraction (CNN): The CNN
component acts as a spatial feature extractor. For
each time step in the input sequence, a series of
convolutional and max-pooling layers are applied to
the H ×W displacement map. Our network consists
of three convolutional blocks that progressively re-
duce the spatial dimensions from 256×256 down to
32×32 while increasing the feature depth (from 1 to
128 channels). This hierarchical process allows the
model to learn spatial features ranging from simple
local textures to more complex regional patterns of
deformation.
• Temporal Feature Extraction (LSTM): The se-
quence of flattened feature vectors extracted by the
CNN is then fed into an LSTM layer. The LSTM
is a specialized Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
architecture designed to learn long-range dependen-
cies in sequential data [17]. It utilizes input, output,
and forget gates to regulate the flow of information
through time, enabling it to effectively model the

--- Sayfa 6 ---
Symbol
Description
Input Data & Parameters
Draw
Raw dataset from CSV file with point-
based time series.
Tin
Length of the input time series window
(300 steps).
Tout
The specific future time step targeted
for prediction.
H, W
Height and width of the spatial grid
(256×256).
p
Set of 2D coordinates (Easting, Nor-
thing) for measurement points.
G
The regular H × W grid used for
spatial interpolation.
Data Structures
X
Input data tensor of shape (Tin, H, W)
after gridding.
Xt
A single dense displacement map at an
input time step t.
Ytrue
The ground truth displacement map for
the target time Tout.
X5D
5D input tensor for the CNN-LSTM
model.
Xtable
Tabular version of X, with pixels as
rows and time steps as columns.
ytrue
Vectorized version of the ground truth
map Ytrue.
Models & Outputs
M
The
set
of
all
models:
{MCNN-LSTM, MLGBM, MLasso}.
MCNN-LSTM
The trained CNN-LSTM model.
MLGBM
The trained LightGBM model.
MLasso
The trained Lasso regression model.
ˆYm
The predicted displacement map gen-
erated by a model m ∈M.
Evaluation & Interpretation
RMSEm
Root Mean Squared Error for a model
m.
R2
m
Coefficient
of
determination
(R-
squared) for a model m.
E
The SHAP TreeExplainer object for the
LightGBM model.
ΦLGBM
Matrix of SHAP values calculated for
the LightGBM model.
TABLE I: Notation Key for the Forecasting and Analysis
Pipeline.
temporal evolution of the spatial features. We use
the hidden state from the final time step of the
LSTM sequence as a comprehensive representation
of the entire input history.
Finally, a fully-connected linear layer maps this final
hidden state to the desired output shape, producing a
complete predicted displacement map ˆYCNN-LSTM of size
H × W. The entire model is trained end-to-end by
minimizing the Mean Squared Error (MSE) between the
predicted and target displacement maps using the Adam
optimizer.
2) LightGBM: LightGBM is a highly efficient, gradient-
boosting decision tree (GBDT) framework [16]. Unlike
the CNN-LSTM, LightGBM does not inherently process
spatial data. Instead, we transform the input data into a
tabular format, Xtable, where each row corresponds to a
single pixel and the columns represent the displacement
values over the Tin time steps. The model’s objective
is to predict the target displacement for each pixel
independently. It builds an ensemble of decision trees
sequentially, where each new tree corrects the errors of
the previous ones. We train the model using a portion
of the pixels as a training set and evaluate on a hold-
out validation set, employing early stopping to prevent
overfitting and identify the optimal number of boosting
rounds.
3) Lasso Regression: As a robust linear baseline, we
use Lasso (Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection
Operator) Regression [18]. Similar to LightGBM, this
model operates on the tabular data matrix Xtable. Lasso
is a linear regression model that incorporates an L1
regularization term into its loss function. The loss func-
tion is defined as the sum of the MSE and the L1-
norm of the coefficient vector, weighted by a regular-
ization parameter α. This regularization has the effect
of shrinking some feature coefficients to exactly zero,
effectively performing automatic feature selection. In
our context, this helps identify which past time steps are
most influential for predicting the future displacement.
Our implementation uses PyTorch to train the model on a
GPU, optimizing the Lasso loss function with the Adam
optimizer.
D. Performance comparison for each model
1) Usage for comparison metrics: We used the following
parameters to test the model performance when performing
the estimation task. Equations and definitions are as follows
[19]:
1) RMSE(y, ˆy) =
q PN−1
i=0 (yi−ˆyi)2
N
Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) is the square root of
the mean squared differences between the predicted and
actual values. Lower RMSE indicates better prediction
accuracy.
2) MSE(y, ˆy) =
PN−1
i=0 (yi−ˆyi)2
N
Mean Squared Error (MSE) measures prediction error
by calculating the average squared difference between
the observed and predicted values. A lower MSE means
that the model has less error and fits the data better.
3) R2 = 1 −
P(yi−ˆ
yi)2
P(yi−¯y)2
The coefficient of determination (R2) indicates how
well the model fits the data. It is essential to evaluate
the accuracy of the model in predicting outcomes or
testing hypotheses. As a percentage, the value is always
between 0 and 1. A higher R2 means more output values
are accounted for by the input values.
In our training and testing process, we trained the models
on the training set and tested their performance using the
above parameters generated by the test set. This helps us to
evaluate the performance of the model and the accuracy of the
prediction.

--- Sayfa 7 ---
2) Quantitative and Statistical Error Analysis: For a more
granular and quantitative evaluation, a comprehensive error
and residual analysis was performed. This involved generating
a suite of diagnostic graphs for each model, as presented in
Figure. 4, to systematically dissect the nature and distribution
of the prediction errors. The following four metrics were used:
1) Scatter Plots: These plots of predicted versus actual
displacement values were used to assess the overall
correlation and identify any systematic deviations from
the ideal one-to-one relationship.
2) Residual Plots: To detect model bias, the residuals
(the difference between predicted and true values) were
plotted against the true displacement values. This helps
reveal whether the model systematically overestimates
or underestimates displacement in certain ranges.
3) Binned Mean Absolute Error (MAE): To understand
how the performance of the model varies with the
magnitude of displacement, the MAE was calculated and
plotted for different bins (ranges) of the true displace-
ment values.
4) Binned Residuals Boxplots: To analyze the statistical
distribution of the errors, box plots of residuals were
generated for each bin of true displacement. This pro-
vides a clear view of the median error, the interquartile
range (error variance), and the presence of outliers
throughout the data range.
Together, these diagnostic plots facilitate a rigorous, mul-
tifaceted comparison of the predictive accuracy, bias, and
stability of the LASSO, LightGBM, and CNN-LSTM models.
3) Visual Assessment of Spatial Prediction: A qualitative
visual analysis was conducted to evaluate each model’s ability
to reproduce the spatial characteristics of the ground-truth
displacement. The predicted displacement maps for the final
time step from the LASSO, LightGBM and proposed CNN-
LSTM models were compared side by side with the ground-
truth map, as shown in Figure . 5. This direct comparison
serves to assess how effectively each model captures key
features, including the shape and boundaries of the primary
deformation zone, the internal texture of the displacement
field, and any localized anomalies. The primary goal of this
assessment is to evaluate the spatial coherence and physical
realism of the predictions beyond simple quantitative metrics.
4) Usage for correlation analysis for different parameters
(SHAP analysis): To interpret the temporal dependencies
learned by our LightGBM displacement prediction model,
we employ SHapley additive exPlanations (SHAP) values - a
game-theoretic approach that quantifies feature contributions
to model predictions based on Shapley values [20]. The
Shapley value provides a theoretically grounded mechanism
to fairly attribute predictive outcomes to individual features
by evaluating their marginal contributions across all possible
feature coalitions.
ϕi(f, x) =
X
S⊆F \{i}
|S|! ·(|F|−|S|−1)!
|F|!
[fx(S ∪{i}) −fx(S)]
(1)
where ϕi is the Shapley value for the feature i, F is the
complete set of features, S represents a subset of features
and fx(S) denotes the prediction of the model when only
the features in S are retained (others masked with baseline
values).
Our SHAP analysis pipeline, formalized in Algorithm. 2,
systematically quantifies the contribution of historical dis-
placement values in each timestep to future land deformation
predictions. This dual-scale approach reveals both global tem-
poral patterns and pixel-level dynamics critical for geophysical
interpretation. Table. II describes variables used in the algo-
rithm.
Algorithm 2 SHAP Interpretation Pipeline for InSAR Dis-
placement Forecasting
Require: MLGB: Trained LightGBM model (Section. III-C)
1: Dtest: Test dataset (Xtest, ytest)
2: K: Sample size for SHAP computation (10,000 pixels)
Ensure: Global feature importance profiles
3: Local prediction-decomposition plots
4: Initialize Tree Explainer
5: E ←TreeExplainer(MLGB)
▷Computes SHAP values via
path-dependent perturbation [20]
6: ϕbase ←E.expected value
▷Baseline prediction (average
model output)
7: Compute SHAP Values
8: Φ ←E.shap values(Xtest[0 : K])
9: Global Feature Analysis
10: Generate summary plot: shap.summary_plot(Φ, Xtest[0 :
K], F)
11: where F = {ft−τ | τ = Tin, . . . , 1}
▷Features ft−τ:
displacement at τ timesteps before prediction
12: Local Prediction Decomposition
13: Select representative pixel p: xp ←Xtest[p], ϕp ←Φ[p]
14: Generate force plot: force_plot(ϕbase, ϕp, xp, F)
▷
Visualizes feature contributions relative to baseline
15: SAR-Specific Baseline Validation (Optional)
16: if clutter_aware = True then
17:
L ←PK
i=1
PTin
j=1|ϕij|+λ · MMD2(Xclutter, b)
18: end if
Symbol
Description
MLGB
Trained
LightGBM
regression
model
Dtest
Test dataset (input windows and
target displacements)
Tin
Input window length (29 timesteps)
E
SHAP TreeExplainer object
ϕbase
Baseline prediction value (expected
model output)
Φ
Matrix of SHAP values (ϕij = con-
tribution of timestep j to sample i)
F
Feature
set:
historical
displace-
ments {ft−29, ft−28, . . . , ft−1}
xp
Input window for a specific pixel p
Xclutter
Bac kground clutter distribution
(e.g., Rayleigh/Weibull)
MMD
Maximum Mean Discrepancy dis-
tributional distance metric
TABLE II: Notation Key for SHAP Analysis

--- Sayfa 8 ---
IV. RESULTS
A. Performance assessment using classification metrics
To complement the visual analysis, we computed the Root
Mean Squared Error (RMSE), Mean Squared Error (MSE),
and the coefficient of determination (R2) for each model, with
the results summarized in Table. III.
models
RMSE
MSE
R2
LASSO Regression
1.2101
1.4644
0.9504
CNN-LSTM
0.2854
0.5342
0.9901
Lightgbm
1.3005
1.6914
0.9424
TABLE III: RMSE, MSE, and R2 for each model
The CNN-LSTM model emerges as the superior architec-
ture, achieving an RMSE of 0.2854 and an R2 value of 0.9901.
This indicates an extremely high degree of accuracy and a
near-perfect fit to the target data, confirming that its ability to
learn from both spatial and temporal features yields the most
precise predictions.
The LASSO Regression and LightGBM models, while still
achieving high R2 values of 0.9504 and 0.9424 respectively,
exhibit significantly higher errors. The LASSO model’s RMSE
of 1.2101 is more than four times higher than that of the
CNN-LSTM, and the LightGBM model performs the poorest
with an RMSE of 1.3005. These higher error values align with
the visual discrepancies observed in their respective prediction
maps, such as magnitude offsets and noisy artifacts.
B. Comparative Error Analysis
To perform a granular evaluation of the model performance,
a detailed comparative error analysis was performed. Figure. 4
provides a comprehensive set of diagnostic plots, structured
for direct comparison. We assess performance across each
diagnostic metric (columns) to highlight the relative strengths
and weaknesses of each model.
Column 1: Scatter Plots (Predicted vs. Actual): The scatter
plots reveal the fundamental correlation between the predicted
and actual values. The LASSO model, Figure. 4a, establishes
a baseline, showing a clear linear trend but with significant
spread around the identity line. The performance of the
LightGBM model, Figure. 4e, represents a severe degradation,
with a much wider dispersion and a clear curvilinear pattern,
indicating systematic errors. In contrast, the CNN-LSTM
plot, Figure . 4i, is exemplary, with data points forming a
tight, narrow line, visually confirming its superior predictive
accuracy.
Column 2: Residual Plots: The residual plots expose the
underlying biases in the models. It reveals the residual value
(difference between the prediction and the real displacement
value) according to the variation of the true displacement
value. The LASSO residuals , shown in Figure. 4b are clus-
tered around zero but in a non-uniform shape, suggesting
inconsistent error variance. The LightGBM plot, Figure. 4f,
displays a clear, systematic curvilinear bias. This pattern shows
that the model consistently underestimates the magnitude
of large negative displacements, a critical failure for this
application. The CNN-LSTM model’s residual plot, Figure. 4j,
however, shows a tight, random, and unbiased distribution of
errors along the zero line, indicating a robust and reliable
model.
Column 3: Binned Mean Absolute Error: This analysis
quantifies the error across different ranges of true displace-
ment. It reveals the Mean Absolute Value (MAE) according
to the variation of the true displacement value. Although
the LASSO model error plot, Figure. 4c, is relatively low,
it fluctuates, peaking at the extremes. The LightGBM plot ,
Figure. 4g, quantifies its failure to predict large subsidence,
with the mean absolute error skyrocketing to over 100 mm.
The CNN-LSTM plot, Figure. 4k, again demonstrates its
superiority, with the error remaining close to zero in nearly
the entire range of data, proving its effectiveness and stability.
Column 4: Binned Residuals Boxplots: The binned residual
boxplots provide a distributional view of the model errors
across different ranges of true displacement. This analysis
is particularly useful for identifying systematic biases and
variations in error magnitude.
The LASSO plot, Figure. 4d shows moderate error vari-
ance and reveals a significant number of outliers in several
bins, suggesting inconsistent performance. In contrast, the
LightGBM boxplot, Figure. 4d, visually confirms the model’s
systemic bias; for large negative displacements, the boxes are
large and heavily skewed upward, indicating that the model
consistently and significantly underestimates subsidence.
Finally, the CNN-LSTM plot, Figure. 4l, demonstrates
exceptional performance. Its boxplots are compressed into
flat lines near zero across nearly all displacement bins. This
indicates negligible error variance and a lack of significant
outliers, confirming the model is robust, unbiased, and highly
reliable across the entire range of observed ground movement.
Summary of Analysis: This column-by-column comparison
consistently demonstrates the superiority of the proposed
CNN-LSTM model. Across every diagnostic metric, from
overall correlation and bias detection to binned error analysis,
CNN-LSTM outperforms baseline models, which suffer from
moderate inaccuracies (LASSO) or severe systematic failures
(LightGBM).
C. Visual Comparison of Predicted and Ground Truth Dis-
placement Maps
Beyond quantitative metrics, a qualitative visual analysis
of the predicted displacement maps provides critical insights
into the performance of each model. This comparison allows
us to assess how well each model captures the spatial het-
erogeneity and key deformation features present in the target
data. Figure. 5 presents a side-by-side comparison of the
real displacement map from the final time step against the
estimated maps generated by the LASSO, LightGBM, and
proposed CNN-LSTM models.
As illustrated in Figure. 5a, the LASSO regression model,
which is a linear model, struggled significantly to replicate
the complex spatial distribution of ground displacement. The
resulting map is too smooth and does not capture the distinct
boundaries of the central deformation zone. Furthermore,
localized anomalies, such as the area of higher displacement

--- Sayfa 9 ---
(a) LASSO: Scatter
(b) LASSO: Residual
(c) LASSO: Binned Error
(d) LASSO: Binned Boxplot
(e) LightGBM: Scatter
(f) LightGBM: Residual
(g) LightGBM: Binned Error
(h) LightGBM: Binned Boxplot
(i) CNN-LSTM: Scatter
(j) CNN-LSTM: Residual
(k) CNN-LSTM: Binned Error
(l) CNN-LSTM: Binned Boxplot
Fig. 4: Comprehensive error analysis for all three models. The top row (a-d) displays diagnostics for LASSO Regression. The
middle row (e-h) shows diagnostics for LightGBM. The bottom row (i-l) presents the results for the proposed CNN-LSTM
model. The columns, from left to right, represent: Scatter Plot (Predicted vs. Actual), Residual Plot, Binned Error Plot, and
Binned Residuals Boxplot. The superior performance of the CNN-LSTM model is evident across all metrics, particularly in
the tightly clustered scatter plot (i) and the randomly distributed, low-magnitude residuals (j).
in the top-right corner, are entirely absent from the prediction.
This indicates that the LASSO model primarily captures the
large-scale average displacement but is incapable of modeling
the intricate, nonlinear spatial dependencies inherent in the
data.
The LightGBM model, shown in Figure. 5b, offers a marked
improvement over the LASSO baseline. Identifies and delin-
eates the primary area of displacement in the center of the
map successfully. The general shape and magnitude of this
zone are reasonably well-approximated. However, the model
still exhibits a degree of spatial smoothing. The fine textures
within the deformation zone are blurred, and the intensity of
the peak displacement in the top right corner is underestimated
compared to the ground truth. While LightGBM can model
non-linear relationships, its pixel-independent approach limits
its ability to learn from spatial context, leading to a loss of
high-frequency spatial details.
In contrast, the prediction of the proposed CNN-LSTM
model, presented in Figure . 5c, demonstrates superior perfor-
mance with remarkable visual fidelity to the real displacement
map. CNN-LSTM accurately reproduces sharp boundaries, in-
ternal textures, and the overall shape of the central deformation
area. Crucially, it also captures the localized, high-magnitude
displacement feature in the top-right corner with high precision
in terms of both location and intensity. This high-quality
reconstruction underscores the strength of the CNN-LSTM
architecture. The convolutional layers effectively learn the
spatial context and patterns of deformation at multiple scales,

--- Sayfa 10 ---
(a) LASSO Regression Estimation
(b) LightGBM Estimation
(c) CNN-LSTM Estimation
Fig. 5: Comparison between the ground truth displacement map (left side of each subfigure) and the estimated displacement
maps (right side of each subfigure) from the three models. The models were trained on previous displacement data to predict
the map for the final timestep. The results shown are for (a) LASSO Regression, (b) LightGBM, and (c) CNN-LSTM.

--- Sayfa 11 ---
while the LSTM component models their evolution over time.
This combined spatio-temporal learning approach enables the
model to generate forecasts that are not only quantitatively
accurate, but also spatially coherent and realistic.
D. SHAP analysis on the prediction parameters
As illustrated in Section. III-D4, we applied a SHAP anal-
ysis after training for lightgbm model to help us understand
how training variables affect the estimation. The result of the
SHAP summary plot is shown in Figure. 6, and the result of
the SHAP force plot is shown in Figure. 7.
1) Global Feature Importance: Figure. 6 shows the SHAP
summary plot, which illustrates the impact of each characteris-
tic in all test samples. The features are ranked by their global
importance, with each point on a feature’s row representing
the SHAP value for a single-pixel’s prediction.
The analysis reveals that the model predictions are over-
whelmingly dominated by the most recent time step, ‘t-1‘.
This feature exhibits the largest spread of SHAP values,
indicating its significant influence. The plot clearly shows a
strong positive correlation: high displacement values at ‘t-1‘
(red points) have large positive SHAP values, pushing the
model’s prediction higher, while low values (blue points) have
large negative SHAP values, driving the prediction lower.
The influence of other time steps diminishes rapidly. While
‘t-2‘ and ‘t-3‘ show some minor contribution, the impact of all
older time steps is negligible, with their SHAP values clustered
tightly around zero. This indicates that the LightGBM model
has primarily learned a strong persistence or auto-regressive
pattern, where the state of the system at the immediately
preceding time step is the most critical factor for forecasting
the future state.
2) Local Prediction Analysis: While the summary plot
provides a global overview, a SHAP force plot allows us to
decompose an individual prediction. Figure. 7 illustrates this
for a single representative pixel of the test set. The plot shows
how different feature values push the prediction away from
the base value (the average prediction over the dataset, which
is -2.768).
For this specific pixel, the model output is -2.546. The
features shown in red, such as ‘t-1‘, ‘t-293‘, and ‘t-40‘, have
a positive SHAP value and contribute to increasing the pre-
diction above the base value. In contrast, blue characteristics,
such as ‘t-296‘ and ‘t-297‘, have a negative impact, pushing the
prediction lower. The final output value represents the balance
of these competing forces. This local analysis confirms the
global finding that the most recent time steps have the largest
quantitative impact on individual predictions.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this study, we developed and evaluated a novel spatio-
temporal prediction framework for forecasting ground dis-
placement using Sentinel-1 InSAR data. By transforming
sparse point measurements into a dense sequence of dis-
placement maps, we enabled the application of advanced
deep learning models capable of understanding both spatial
and temporal contexts. We compared the performance of our
proposed CNN-LSTM model against robust LightGBM and
LASSO regression baselines.
Our results conclusively demonstrate that the CNN-LSTM
architecture provides the most accurate predictions, achieving
an R² value of 0.9901 and an RMSE of 0.2854. This su-
perior performance underscores the importance of explicitly
modeling the intertwined spatial and temporal characteristics
inherent in ground deformation data. While the LASSO re-
gression also provided a reasonable baseline, the LightGBM
model, despite its power in many regression tasks, struggled
to generalize, producing predictions with significant artifacts.
Our SHAP analysis of the LightGBM model revealed that
it learned a simple auto-regressive dependency on the most
recent time step, failing to integrate information from the
broader temporal sequence, which likely contributed to its
higher error rate. The SHAP analysis reveals that the Light-
GBM model, despite its complexity, defaults to a simplistic
persistence model, overwhelmingly relying on the t-1 feature.
This failure to integrate longer-term temporal information and
spatial context explains its poor performance. In contrast,
the CNN-LSTM architecture is explicitly designed to capture
both deep temporal dependencies via its LSTM component
and spatial patterns via its CNN layers, which elucidates its
vastly superior predictive accuracy. The primary contribution
of this work is the validation of a deep learning pipeline
that can produce high-fidelity, spatially coherent forecasts of
ground movement, offering a valuable tool for infrastructure
monitoring and geological risk assessment.
For future work, several avenues for enhancement can be ex-
plored. First, more advanced deep learning architectures, such
as Vision Transformers or Graph Neural Networks (GNNs),
could be investigated to potentially capture long-range spatial
dependencies more effectively than CNNs. Second, the fusion
of additional data sources—such as meteorological records
(e.g., rainfall), geological surveys (e.g., soil type), and anthro-
pogenic activity (e.g., construction schedules)—could provide
valuable contextual information and further improve model
accuracy. Finally, extending the model’s predictive capabilities
from a single-step to a multi-step forecast would significantly
increase its practical utility for long-term planning and early-
warning systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was conducted with the financial support
of Science Foundation Ireland under Grant Agreement No.
13/RC/2106 P2 at the ADAPT SFI Research Centre at Uni-
versity College Dublin. ADAPT, the SFI Research Centre for
AI-Driven Digital Content Technology is funded by Science
Foundation Ireland through the SFI Research Centres Pro-
gramme. This work is partly supported by China Scholarship
Council (202306540013).
REFERENCES
[1] T. Q. Cuong, D. H. Tong Minh, L. Van Trung, and T. Le Toan, “Ground
subsidence monitoring in vietnam by multi-temporal insar technique,”
in 2015 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium
(IGARSS), 2015, pp. 3540–3543.

--- Sayfa 12 ---
Fig. 6: SHAP summary plot for the LightGBM model. This plot shows the distribution of SHAP values for each feature,
ranked by importance. The most recent timestep, ‘t-1‘, has the most significant impact on the model’s predictions.

--- Sayfa 13 ---
−1.722
−1.622
−1.522
−1.422
−1.322
−1.222
−1.122
t-15 = 0.0502
t-28 = 3.169
t-6 = −0.3769
t-29 = 1.164
t-3 = −0.7888
t-1 = −1.305
t-8 = −3.633
t-2 = −2.464
t-4 = −2.017
t-5 = −1.904
t-7 = −1.654
t-9 = −2.993
t-11 = −2.017
base value
−1.37
−1.37
−1.37
higher →
f(x)
←lower
Fig. 7: SHAP force plot showing the feature contributions for a single prediction (pixel 0). Features in red increase the
prediction, while features in blue decrease it. The final prediction is the balance point of these forces.
[2] L. Zou, K. Takahashi, and M. Sato, “Displacement estimation and
monitoring from ground-based sar amplitude components,” in 2014 Asia-
Pacific Microwave Conference, 2014, pp. 1327–1329.
[3] Y. Cheng, W. Zhang, F. Zhao, and S. Yang, “Typical landslide mon-
itoring early warning and susceptibility evaluation based on bp neural
network model in zhouzhi county,” in 2024 IEEE 2nd International Con-
ference on Sensors, Electronics and Computer Engineering (ICSECE),
2024, pp. 1–6.
[4] D. Tapete, F. Cigna, R. Lasaponara, N. Masini, and P. Milillo, “Deforma-
tion analysis of a metropolis from c- to x-band psi: Proof-of-concept with
cosmo-skymed over rome, italy,” in 2015 IEEE International Geoscience
and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS), 2015, pp. 4606–4609.
[5] F. Zhao, J. J. Mallorqui, and J. M. Lopez-Sanchez, “Impact of sar
image resolution on polarimetric persistent scatterer interferometry with
amplitude dispersion optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience
and Remote Sensing, vol. 60, pp. 1–10, 2022.
[6] S. Azadnejad, A. Hrysiewicz, A. Trafford, F. O’Loughlin, E. Holohan,
F. Kelly, and S. Donohue, “Insar supported by geophysical and
geotechnical information constrains two-dimensional motion of a
railway embankment constructed on peat,” Engineering Geology, vol.
333, p. 107493, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0013795224000917
[7] B.
Osmano˘glu,
F.
Sunar,
S.
Wdowinski,
and
E.
Cabral-Cano,
“Time series analysis of insar data: Methods and trends,” ISPRS
Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, vol. 115, pp.
90–102,
2016,
theme
issue
’State-of-the-art
in
photogrammetry,
remote sensing and spatial information science’. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0924271615002269
[8] R. Palam`a, M. Cuevas-Gonz´alez, A. Barra, Q. Gao, S. Shahbazi,
J. A. Navarro, O. Monserrat, and M. Crosetto, “Automatic ground
deformation detection from european ground motion service products,”
in IGARSS 2023 - 2023 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Symposium, 2023, pp. 8190–8193.
[9] S.
Azadnejad,
Y.
Maghsoudi,
and
D.
Perissin,
“Evaluation
of
polarimetric capabilities of dual polarized sentinel-1 and terrasar-x data
to improve the psinsar algorithm using amplitude dispersion index
optimization,” International Journal of Applied Earth Observation
and Geoinformation, vol. 84, p. 101950, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0303243419302995
[10] W. Yao, S. Donohue, and S. Dev, “Optimizing remote sensing image
classification with spectral indices and convolutional neural networks,”
in 2023 IEEE 7th Conference on Energy Internet and Energy System
Integration (EI2), 2023, pp. 3628–3633.
[11] M. A. Azeem and S. Dev, “A performance and interpretability
assessment of machine learning models for rainfall prediction in
the republic of ireland,” Decision Analytics Journal, vol. 12, p.
100515,
2024.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S277266222400119X
[12] A. Shakeel, R. J. Walters, S. K. Ebmeier, and N. A. Moubayed,
“Aladdin: Autoencoder-lstm-based anomaly detector of deformation in
insar,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, vol. 60,
pp. 1–12, 2022.
[13] Y. Wen, X. Wan, D. Yuan, L. Zhang, D. Ge, and L. Zhang, “C-lstm
for mt-insar ground deformation prediction,” in IGARSS 2024 - 2024
IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, 2024,
pp. 11 016–11 019.
[14] W. Yao, S. Azadnejad, S. Donohue, and S. Dev, “A study on spatial
prediction models and influential parameters of deformation in western
ireland,” in 2024 17th International Congress on Image and Signal
Processing, BioMedical Engineering and Informatics (CISP-BMEI),
2024, pp. 1–6.
[15] M. Costantini, F. Minati, F. Trillo, A. Ferretti, F. Novali, E. Passera,
J. Dehls, Y. Larsen, P. Marinkovic, M. Eineder, R. Brcic, R. Siegmund,
P. Kotzerke, M. Probeck, A. Kenyeres, S. Proietti, L. Solari, and H. S.
Andersen, “European ground motion service (egms),” in 2021 IEEE
International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium IGARSS,
2021, pp. 3293–3296.
[16] B. Li, K. Liu, M. Wang, Y. Wang, Q. He, L. Zhuang, and
W. Zhu, “High-spatiotemporal-resolution dynamic water monitoring
using lightgbm model and sentinel-2 msi data,” International Journal
of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation, vol. 118, p.
103278,
2023.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1569843223001000
[17] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, p. 1735–1780, Nov. 1997. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735
[18] J. Ranstam and J. A. Cook, “Lasso regression,” Journal of British
Surgery, vol. 105, no. 10, pp. 1348–1348, 2018.
[19] K. Venkatraman, M. Akashvarma, and S. Siddharth, “Enhancing soft-
ware test effort estimation using ensemble learning algorithms,” in 2024
4th International Conference on Intelligent Technologies (CONIT), 2024,
pp. 1–5.
[20] S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model
predictions,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 30,
2017.
