
--- Sayfa 1 ---
 
From Earthquake Nowcasting to Earthquake Forecasting 
 
 
1 
 
From Local Earthquake Nowcasting to Natural Time Forecasting:   
A Simple Do-It-Yourself (DIY) Method  
 
John B Rundle1,2,3, Ian Baughman1,  Andrea Donnellan4,3, Lisa Grant5, Geoffrey Fox6 
 
1 University of California, Davis, CA 
2 Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, NM 
3 Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA 
4 Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 
5 University of California, Irvine, CA 
6 University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 
 
Abstract 
 
Previous papers have outlined nowcasting methods to track the current state of 
earthquake hazard using only observed seismic catalogs.  The basis for one of these methods, 
the "counting method", is the Gutenberg-Richter (GR) magnitude-frequency relation.  The 
GR  relation states that for every large earthquake of magnitude greater than MT , there are 
on average NGR small earthquakes of magnitude MS.  In this paper we use this basic relation, 
combined with the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) formalism from machine 
learning, to compute the probability of a large earthquake.  The probability is conditioned on 
the number of small earthquakes n(t) that have occurred since the last large earthquake.  We 
work in natural time, which is defined as the count of small earthquakes between large 
earthquakes.  We do not need to assume a probability model, which is a major advantage.  
Instead, the probability is computed as the Positive Predictive Value (PPV) associated with 
the ROC curve.  We find that the PPV following the last large earthquake initially decreases 
as more small earthquakes occur, indicating the property of temporal clustering of large 
earthquakes as is observed.  As the number of small earthquakes continues to accumulate, 
the PPV subsequently begins to increase.  Eventually a point is reached beyond which the 
rate of increase becomes much larger and more dramatic.  Here we describe and illustrate 
the method by applying it to a local region around Los Angeles, California, following the 
January 17, 1994 magnitude M6.7 Northridge earthquake.   
 
Key Points 
 
• Earthquake nowcasting tracks the current risk of a large earthquake in local regions 
by counting small earthquakes 
• The method can be extended to future-looking earthquake forecasting using 
standard machine learning methods 
• A major advantage is that the forecast probability curve is determined directly from 
the data itself, rather than being assumed 
 
 

--- Sayfa 2 ---
 
From Earthquake Nowcasting to Earthquake Forecasting 
 
 
2 
 
Plain Language Summary 
 
Forecasting and predicting the location and time of major earthquakes are long-sought 
goals.  Unlike weather forecasting, the data needed for detailed and precise earthquake 
forecasting will always be incomplete.  The state of tectonic stress and the strength of faults, 
which are the data needed for such predictions, cannot be observed by any means currently 
known.  As a result, we must rely on indirect methods.  What can be observed is data 
represented by earthquake catalogs, which include the time, location, and magnitude of the 
events.  In past works, we have shown that the current state of the local regions can be 
observed by counting the number of small earthquakes since the last large earthquake in a 
region.  We have called this method earthquake nowcasting.  In the present paper, we use 
the statistics of these small events, combined with signal detection methods from machine 
learning, to compute the probability of future large earthquakes given the current state of 
the fault system.  We then illustrate these procedures by application to the region around 
Los Angeles, CA following the January 17, 1994 magnitude M6.7 Northridge earthquake.  
Major advantages of the proposed method are its basic simplicity, and the fact that there are 
no unknown parameters that must be assumed or set by arbitrary means.   
 
Introduction 
 
Background.  Earthquake nowcasting is the estimation of the current state of a 
seismically active region.  The term nowcasting is used in the same sense as for weather and 
economic nowcasting (e.g., Rundle et al., 2016; Rundle et al., 2021a), the determination of 
the current state of a system in the recent past, current time, and the near future.  Methods 
to produce earthquake nowcasts have been the subject of previous papers, a selection of 
which are: (Rundle et al., 2016; 2018; 2019a; 2019b; 2020; 2021a,b; 2022a,b; 2024; Pasari 
and Mehta, 2018; Pasari, 2019; Pasari, 2020; Pasari and Sharma, 2020; Chouliaras, 2009; 
Chouliaras et al., 2023; Perez-Oregon, 2020).  In general, these methods take three forms: 
 
• A "counting" method using counts of small earthquakes of a small completeness 
magnitude MS to track the chance of future large earthquakes (Rundle et al., 2016) 
having a target magnitude MT, MT >> MS. 
• A "filter" method, in which the monthly rate of small earthquakes is filtered and 
optimized to produce a time series that gradually increases prior to large 
earthquakes, and decreases sharply after them (Rundle et al., 2022a).   
• An "eigenpattern" method in which a regional time series is constructed by expanding 
the space time patterns of small earthquakes in a series of the eigenvectors of a 
correlation matrix (Rundle et al., 2022b). 
 
The basis for the counting method is the Gutenberg-Richter magnitude frequency 
relation.  The filter method produces a time series that strongly resembles the hypothesized 
buildup and release of tectonic stress, along with a spatial probability density function 

--- Sayfa 3 ---
 
From Earthquake Nowcasting to Earthquake Forecasting 
 
 
3 
 
indicating probable locations of the future large earthquakes.  The filter is optimized by a 
machine learning method based on the skill measure of the associated Receiver Operating 
Characteristic (ROC), leading to the computation of the precision, or Positive Predictive 
Value (PPV), which in turn is the probability of a future large earthquake.  The eigenpattern 
method produces a time series that closely resembles the time series produced by the filter 
method.   
In this paper, we exploit the counting method, together with the ROC and PPV to produce 
local earthquake forecasts in seismically active circular regions around points of interest.  
We apply the method to a circular region of radius 125 km around the city of Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.  A major advantage of this method is that the probability of a future large 
earthquake is determined directly from the catalog data, with no arbitrary assumptions. 
The forecast method developed here is in natural time, counts of small earthquakes.  To 
transform this method to clock or calendar time, a mapping is needed to associate 
earthquake counts with clock/calendar time.  While we briefly address this topic in the 
discussion, we defer a more detailed consideration to a future paper. 
Natural Time and a Principle of Statistical Equivalence.  In this paper we work in 
natural time (Varotsos 2001, 2011, 2014; Holliday et al, 206b; Rundle et al., 2021a).  Natural 
time is defined as the count of small earthquakes of magnitude MS that have occurred since 
the last large "target" earthquake having magnitude MT.  Given the Gutenberg-Richter 
relation, every large earthquake of magnitude greater than MT  is associated with, on average,  
NGR small earthquakes of magnitude MS as explained below. 
In the counting method, we consider a seismically active circular region centered on a 
point of interest.  The circular region is embedded in a larger region with a substantially 
more target earthquakes than the circular region.  In addition, the larger region is selected 
to have the same Gutenberg-Richter statistics (i.e., b-value) as the circular region, implying 
that both have the same statistics.  We consider this similarity to represent a principle of 
"statistical equivalence", so that we can use the much larger ensemble of target earthquakes 
in the region to create the natural time forecast of the few target earthquakes in the circle.  
Note that there must have been at least one earthquake withing the circle with magnitude 
greater than MT. 
Over the same long calendar time interval, the long term occurrence rate of small 
earthquakes per unit calendar time in the large region, RR, will be larger than the long term 
rate of small earthquakes in the circle, RC:  RR >> RC.  There are a correspondingly a larger 
number of target earthquakes as well, which constitute the ensemble of events to consider.  
In the forecast method describe below, we apply the ROC method in the large region to 
compute the PPV in the circle in natural time.  We begin by defining a future number (natural 
time) of small earthquakes DNC in the circular region that will be used for the forecast.  For 
purposes of reference, we can define an average calendar time scale  by: 
 
 
D!!
"! ≡ 𝑇#$%&' 
 
 
 
 
(1) 

--- Sayfa 4 ---
 
From Earthquake Nowcasting to Earthquake Forecasting 
 
 
4 
 
 
This calendar time scale should not be regarded as a future forecast time interval, because 
the rate of accumulation of small earthquakes is not constant, and can in fact be highly 
variable as is well known (e.g., Rundle et al., 2022a), a point that is further discussed below. 
 
Basic Method 
 
We consider an active circular region embedded in a larger active surrounding region.  
We use the GR relation in the form (e.g., Boore, 1989): 
 
𝑁!" = 10#{%!& %"} 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
 
where MT is the magnitude of the large target earthquake of interest, and MS is the small 
(completeness) magnitude, and b is the GR b-value.  
We build a time series in the larger region as described below.  The time series consists 
of a group of earthquake "cycles" between the target earthquakes.  The length of cycle i,  L(Ci), 
is then the number of small earthquakes between target earthquakes bounding the 
beginning and end of cycle i. 
To construct and analyze the time series, we follow these initial steps: 
1. A large region containing a statistically significant number of earthquakes (>~ 20) of 
the target magnitude MT is defined, surrounding the circular region of radius R.  The 
circular region must contain at least one previous earthquake of magnitude MT.  The 
size of the region is adjusted so that the GR statistics of the region match the GR 
statistics of the circular region. 
2. Since it is known (e.g., Gardner and Knopoff, 1974) that the interval statistics of 
earthquakes are generally Poisson distributed, we define an "accumulation function" 
AF as: 
𝐴) = 1 −exp +− 
*
+#$,  
 
 
 
(3) 
 
Here n is the number of small earthquakes (magnitude MS) that have occurred since 
the last large earthquake.  Thus we work in "natural time", as described above.  In this 
method, the current value of the accumulation function is equivalent to the 
Earthquake Potential State (EPS) as defined in (Rundle et al., (2016; 2018; 2019a; 
2019b; 2020; 2021a,b; 2022; 2024).  Note specifically that we do not have any 
information on n(t), i.e., how the number accumulates with time.   

--- Sayfa 5 ---
 
From Earthquake Nowcasting to Earthquake Forecasting 
 
 
5 
 
3. A time series is constructed in the large region in which the value of the time series is 
given by the accumulation function (3) in the interval between target earthquakes.   
4. We define "cycles of activity", where the number of cycles corresponds to the number 
of target earthquakes (minus 1), as will be seen in the figures shown in the application 
below.  When a target earthquake occurs, the accumulation value of the time series is 
reset to zero, and the next cycle begins. 
5. A natural time (not calendar time) forecast window for the future number of small 
earthquakes, DNC , is selected for the circle.   
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) Analysis 
An ROC analysis is conducted on the time series in the large region to build the ROC curve, 
as described in Rundle et al. (2022).  But instead of using the clock or calendar time until the 
next target earthquake, we use natural time.  We determine whether the length L(C) of a 
given earthquake cycle has more small earthquakes than the current number n since the last 
target earthquake.  If it does, then we further determine 1) whether n is less than or greater 
than a threshold value nth; and 2) whether  the total number of small earthquakes in a given 
cycle lies between the current number, n, and the current number plus the expected future 
number,  n+DNC.  For threshold values nTh, we use the number of small earthquakes between 
n = 0 and the maximum cycle length Lmax(C).  All values of nTh are considered successively to 
classify the time series. 
Working in natural time, the implementation of the ROC analysis follows the same 
procedure as in Rundle et al. (2022) to define True Positive (TP), True Negative (TN), False 
Positive(FP) and False Negative (FN).  Note that TP, TN, FP, and FN will be functions of the 
threshold value nTh .  For each cycle, we classify the small earthquakes as follows:   
 
• If n ³ nTh , and the next target earthquake does occur during when n+DNC more 
earthquakes have occurred, n is classified as True Positive, TP(nTh). 
• If n ³ nTh , and the next target earthquake does not occur during when n+DNC  more 
earthquakes have occurred, n is classified as False Positive, FP(nTh). 
• If n < nTh , and the next target earthquake does occur during when n+DNC more 
earthquakes have occurred, n is classified as False Negative, FN(nTh) 
• If n < nTh , and the next target earthquake does not occur during when n+DNC more 
earthquakes have occurred, n is classified as True Negative, TN(nTh). 
 
The process is then repeated for the ensemble of cycles, and the values are aggregated into 
the categories TP(nTh), FP(nTh), TN(nTh), FN(nTh).  Note that the sum over all thresholds of 
these categories must equal the total number of small earthquakes in the time series.   
We now define (Mandrekar, 2010; Powers, 2011) the hit rate or True Positive Rate (TPR), 
the false alarm rate, or False Positive Rate (FPR), and the precision, or Positive Predictive 
Value (PPV): 

--- Sayfa 6 ---
 
From Earthquake Nowcasting to Earthquake Forecasting 
 
 
6 
 
 
𝑇𝑃𝑅 = 
()
() + ,! 
𝐹𝑃𝑅 = 
,)
,) + (!    𝑃𝑃𝑉 = 
()
() + ,) 
 
 
(4) 
 
The ROC diagram is a plot of the TPR vs. the FPR.  The Area Under Curve (AUC), or "skill" is a 
measure of the value of the method.  A skill value of 0.8 or larger is generally deemed to be 
excellent (Powers, 2011).  The precision, or PPV, is then the forecast of target earthquakes 
as a function of the threshold value nTh. 
 
Example:  Application to Los Angeles Region of Southern California 
 
We apply this analysis to events in a circle of radius 125 km around Los Angeles, 
California.  We consider target earthquakes MT ³ 6.0, and a catalog beginning in 1970, with 
small earthquakes MT >M > MS = 3.49.  In the python code referenced in the Open Access 
section below, we include a search in a square surrounding region for side lengths in which 
the GR b-values of region and circle are close in value.   
Using a simple optimization, we found that a box dimension of 7o x 7o in latitude-
longitude centered on Los Angeles gave a b-value for bregion = 0.934 ± 0.008, close to the value 
for bcircle = 0.925 ±  0.019.  b-values were determined for the magnitude range [3.75, 6.5].  
Note that since 1970, 2 earthquakes of the minimum target magnitude MT = 6.0 occurred 
within the circle, the February 9, M6.6 1971 San Fernando earthquake, and the January 17, 
M6.7 Northridge earthquake. 
Figure 1a shows the seismicity in the large surrounding region.  In Figure 1b the time 
series is constructed and plotted using the accumulation function (2).  Again the 
accumulation value represents the Earthquake Potential State (Rundle et al, 2016, d202a). 
Figure 2 is a diagram with the ROC curves at left, and PPV curves at right.    The top PPV 
curve is PPV plotted as a function of the accumulation function values AF with a red dot 
indicating the current value as of 9/23/2025.  The bottom curve is PPV as a function of the 
accumulating small earthquake number n, plotted through 9/23/2025, with the red dot 
terminating the current value of n = 447.   
In Figure 2a, the ROC diagram is computed before any small earthquakes have occurred.  
In Figure 2b, the ROC diagram is computed for the number of small earthquakes, 447, that 
have occurred since the 1994 Northridge earthquake.  We choose a natural time interval in 
the circle DNC = 44 small events (corresponding to TScale = 3 years).  Note that 44 small events  
is approximately the number of events that occurred during the first 3 hours following the 
1994 Northridge earthquake.  Recently it has taken more than 3 years, since February 2022 
until the present, to accumulate 44 small earthquakes within the Northridge circle. Thus 
TScale should not be regarded as a fixed forecast time scale as described above. 
The cyan curves in the ROC diagram are the curves for 50 random forecasts.  These 
random forecasts were computed by building 50 random time series using a bootstrap 

--- Sayfa 7 ---
 
From Earthquake Nowcasting to Earthquake Forecasting 
 
 
7 
 
random sampling algorithm with replacement.  The black diagonal line is the mean of these 
50 random curves, and the dotted lines represent one standard deviation from the mean.  
The diagonal line thus represents a forecast with no information.  The skill score is the area 
under the ROC curve, which is AUC = Skill = 0.46 for Figure 2a, indicating basically random 
skill.  In Figure 2b, the Skill = 0.88, indicating much better skill.  A score greater than 0.8 has 
been classified to represent "excellent" predictive skill (Mandrekar, 2010), a value greater 
than 0.9 is "oustanding".  We also define a "skill index", which is defined as 100% * |(skill - 
0.5)/0.5|.  Skill index has this form since a skill lower than 0.5 represents skill for forecasting 
a "non-event" (Rundle et al., 2024). 
An important caveat is that these ROC diagrams are constructed with the requirement 
that the cycles in the ensemble used must have at least as many small events as the current 
count, which in Figure 2a is 1, and for Figure 2b is 447.  Thus the number of usable cycles for 
Figure 2a is 43, many of which represent "noise cycles", and for Figure 2b is 8, which are the 
much longer-lived cycles, and presumably more "deterministic" and relevant cycles. 
On Figure 2c, we plot the Precision, or Positive Predictive Value (PPV) as a function of the 
accumulation value (AF) for the current earthquake potential state in the circle in which there 
are currently 447 small earthquakes since the 1994 M6.7 Northridge, California earthquake. 
Note the Gutenberg-Richter "wall" at the right hand side, corresponding to the longest cycle 
in the ensemble, with a length of 846 small earthquakes. 
On Figure 2d, we plot the PPV as a function of the accumulating number of small 
earthquakes that have occurred since the Northridge earthquake.  Two distinct regimes or 
phases can be seen.  The first regime is an initial probability of a subsequent target 
earthquake M³ 6.0 of ~17.4%, corresponding to enhanced mainshock clustering.  This initial 
probability then  decreases to ~13.5% when ~120 small earthquakes have occurred.  
Following that initial period, a second period of re-loading leading up to the next M³ 6.0  
target earthquake in the circle can be seen.  This second period begins at small earthquake 
number ~120 and increases as more small earthquakes occur, to a present value of about 
22.5% at the current number 447 of small earthquakes in the circle. 
Figure 3a shows the current state of the target earthquake potential in the circle, 
representing the final slide of the movie that can be produced with the python code.  In this 
figure, the  green bars represent the binned number of small earthquakes in the 43 
earthquake cycles in the large region, a histogram of the total of 43 cycles.  The stair-stepping 
red curve is the cumulative distribution function (CDF), derived from the histogram.  The 
magenta curves close to the red curve represent the 1s standard deviation from the 
histogram, again using a bootstrap method.  The dashed blue line is the accumulation 
function, computed from equation (2). 
In Figure 3b, the red "thermometer" has the same value as the CDF (for easy reference), 
representing the EPS value.  The green "anti-thermometer" = 100% - EPS value (the red 
thermometer), and is the survival distribution function (SDF) value.  In Figure 3c we plot the 
total number of small earthquakes following the 1994 Northridge earthquake up to the 
present time, color coded with more recent earthquakes in hotter colors. Large circle marks 
the epicenter of the Northridge mainshock. 

--- Sayfa 8 ---
 
From Earthquake Nowcasting to Earthquake Forecasting 
 
 
8 
 
Discussion 
The foregoing results can be computed with the Python code that accompanies this 
paper.  The URL for the code is listed in the "Open Research" section below.  The code can be 
used to produce a movie of the development of the nowcast/forecast.  Figure 3 is the final 
slide in a movie.  The code includes a "quickstart" README file that has instructions on how 
to set up and run the code. 
A remaining problem is to map the natural time forecast into a calendar/clock time 
forecast.  To develop this idea, we need a mapping between count increments DNC and 
calendar/clock time increments DtC at time t following the last target earthquake.  For 
aftershocks, this mapping is essentially the Omori relation describing aftershock decay.  This 
relation implies that for constant DtC, DNC decreases inversely with a power of t as time 
increases.  At longer ("non-aftershock") times following the last target earthquake, the 
mapping may be different.  We will defer more detailed consideration of this idea to a future 
publication. 
 
Acknowledgements.  Research by JBR was supported in part by a grant from the Southern 
California Earthquake Center grant #SCON-00007927 to UC Davis, and by the John 
LaBrecque fund, a generous gift from John LaBrecque to the University of California, Davis.  
SCEC contribution number 14988.  The authors would also like to acknowledge an 
informative conversation with Jeanne Hardebeck. 
 
Open Research.  Python code that can be used to reproduce the results of this paper can be 
found at the Zenodo site:  https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17290440   
 
Data. Data for this paper was downloaded from the USGS earthquake catalog for California, 
and are freely available there.  An included method in the Python code mentioned above can 
be used to download these data for analysis. 
 
References 
 
Boore, D.M., 1989. The Richter scale: its development and use for determining earthquake 
source parameters. Tectonophysics, 166(1-3), pp.1-14. 
 
Chouliaras, G, Seismicity anomalies prior to 8 June 2008, Mw=6.4 earthquake in Western 
Greece, Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., 9, 327–335 (2009) 
 
Chouliaras, G., Skordas, E.S. and Sarlis, N.V., 2023. Earthquake nowcasting: Retrospective 
testing in Greece. Entropy, 25(2), p.379. 
 
Gardner, J. K., and Leon Knopoff, Is the sequence of earthquakes in Southern California, with 
aftershocks removed, Poissonian?,  Bulletin of the seismological society of America 64.5, 1363-
1367. (1974) 

--- Sayfa 9 ---
 
From Earthquake Nowcasting to Earthquake Forecasting 
 
 
9 
 
 
Holliday, JR, Rundle, JB, Turcotte, DL, Klein, W. and Tiampo, KF, Space-time correlation and 
clustering of major earthquakes, Phys. Rev. Lett., 97, 238501 (2006b)  
 
Mandrekar, J.N., 2010. Receiver operating characteristic curve in diagnostic test assessment. 
Journal of thoracic oncology, 5(9), pp.1315-1316. 
 
Pasari, S. Nowcasting earthquakes in the Bay-of-Bengal region. Pure Appl. Geophys. 23, 537-
559 (2019). 
 
Pasari, S. Stochastic Modeling of Earthquake Interevent Counts (Natural Times) in Northwest 
Himalaya and Adjoining Regions. In: Bhattacharyya, S., Kumar, J. and Ghoshal, K. 
Mathematical Modeling and Computational Tools, Springer Proceedings in Mathematics & 
Statistics, 320, 495-501, Springer, Singapore (2020). 
 
Pasari, S., and Mehta, A. 2018. Nowcasting earthquakes in the northwest Himalaya and 
surrounding regions. Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spatial Inf. Sci., XLII-5, 855–859 
(2018). 
 
Pasari, S. and Sharma, Y., 2020. Contemporary earthquake hazards in the West-northwest 
Himalaya: A statistical perspective through natural times. Seismological Society of America, 
91(6), pp.3358-3369. 
 
Perez-Oregon, Jennifer, Fernando Angulo-Brown, and Nicholas Vassiliou Sarlis. Nowcasting 
Avalanches as Earthquakes and the Predictability of Strong Avalanches in the Olami-Feder-
Christensen Model. Entropy 22.11 (2020): 1228.  (2020).  
 
Powers, David M.W.  Evaluation: From Precision, Recall and F-Measure to ROC, 
Informedness, Markedness & Correlation, Journal of Machine Learning Technologies. 2 (1): 
37–63 (2011) 
 
Rundle, J.B., Donnellan, A., Grant Ludwig, L, Gong, G., Turcotte, D.L. and Luginbuhl, M. 
Nowcasting earthquakes. Earth and Space Science, 3, 480-486 (2016).  
 
Rundle, J.B., Luginbuhl, M., Giguere, A., and Turcotte, D.L. Natural time, nowcasting and the 
physics of earthquakes: Estimation of risk to global megacities. Pure Appl. Geophys., 175, 647-
660 (2018). 
 
Rundle, J.B., Luginbuhl, M., Khapikova, P. et al. Nowcasting Great Global Earthquake and 
Tsunami Sources,  Pure Appl. Geophys. doi:10.1007/s00024-018-2039-y (2019a) 
 
Rundle, JB, Giguere, A, Turcotte, DL, Crutchfield, JP, and Donnellan, A, Global seismic 
nowcasting with Shannon information entropy, Earth and Space Science, 6, 456-472  
(2019b) 

--- Sayfa 10 ---
 
From Earthquake Nowcasting to Earthquake Forecasting 
 
 
10 
 
 
Rundle, J. B., and Andrea Donnellan, Nowcasting earthquakes in Southern California with 
machine learning: Bursts, swarms, and aftershocks may be related to levels of regional 
tectonic stress, Earth and Space Science 7.9 (2020): e2020EA0010 
 
Rundle, J.B., Stein, S., Donnellan, A., Turcotte, D.L. Klein, W., and Saylor, C., The complex 
dynamics of earthquake fault systems: New approaches to forecasting and nowcasting of 
earthquakes, Reports on Progress in Physics, 84, 7, 076801, (2021a) 
 
Rundle, J.B., Donnellan, A., Fox, GCF, Crutchfield, JP, and Granat, R., Nowcasting earthquakes: 
Imaging the earthquake cycle in California with machine learning, submitted to Earth and 
Space Science, (2021b). 
 
Rundle, J.B., Yazbeck, J., Donnellan, A., Fox, G., Ludwig, L.G., Heflin, M. and Crutchfield, J.  
Optimizing earthquake nowcasting with machine learning: The role of strain hardening in 
the earthquake cycle. Earth and Space Science, 9(11), p.e2022EA002343. (2022a) 
 
Rundle, J.B., Donnellan, A., Fox, G. and Crutchfield, J.P., Nowcasting earthquakes by visualizing 
the earthquake cycle with machine learning: A comparison of two methods. Surveys in 
Geophysics, 43(2), pp.483-501 (2022b). 
 
Rundle, J.B., Baughman, I. and Zhang, T.   Nowcasting earthquakes with stochastic 
simulations: Information entropy of earthquake catalogs. Earth and Space Science, 11(6), 
p.e2023EA003367 (2024) 
 
Varotsos, P., Sarlis, N.V. and Skordas, E.S. Spatiotemporal complexity aspects on the 
interrelation between Seismic Electric Signals and seismicity, Practica of Athens Academy, 
76, 294-321 (2001). 
 
Varotsos, P., Sarlis, N.V. and Skordas, E.S. Natural Time Analysis: The new view of time. 
Precursory Seismic Electric Signals, Earthquakes and other Complex Time-Series. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg (2011). 
 
Varotsos, P., Sarlis, N.V. and Skordas, E.S. Study of the temporal correlations in the magnitude 
time series before major earthquakes in Japan. J. Geophys. Res. Space Phys., 119, 9192-9206 
(2014). 
 
 
 
 

--- Sayfa 11 ---
 
From Earthquake Nowcasting to Earthquake Forecasting 
 
 
11 
 
Figure Captions 
 
Figure 1.  a) Map of seismicity used in the example, the optimal region of 7o latitude x 7o 
longitude centered on Los Angeles, CA.  Earthquakes having magnitudes larger than M6 are 
large red circles as shown in the figure key.   The circle of radius 125 km is shown in blue.  b) 
Time series of the accumulation of small earthquakes as a function of time.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Sayfa 12 ---
 
From Earthquake Nowcasting to Earthquake Forecasting 
 
 
12 
 
 
Figure 2.  a) Red curve is the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) diagram as described 
in the text, a plot of True Positive Rate (TPR, hit rate), vs. False Positive Rate (FPR, false alarm 
rate) just after the last large earthquake when no small earthquakes have yet occurred.  The 
number of useful cycles at this stage is 43 complete cycles since 1980, of the 45 cycles since 
1970.  Cyan curves represent ROC curves for 50 random forecasts.  b) ROC diagram for the 
present day when 447 small earthquakes have occurred since the Northridge earthquake, so 
that only 8 of the 43 cycles can be used.  c)  Plot of the Precision, or Positive Predictive Value 
(PPV) as a function of the accumulation value (AF) for the current earthquake potential state 
in the circle. d) Plot of the PPV as a function of number of small earthquakes that have 
occurred since the Northridge earthquake.  Two distinct regimes or phases can be seen:  1) 
An initial probability of a subsequent M6.0 target earthquake of 17.4%, corresponding to 
enhanced mainshock clustering, which then decreases to 13.5% until ~120 small 
earthquakes have occurred. 2) A second period of re-loading leading up to the next M6.0 
target earthquake in the circle, beginning at small earthquake ~120 and increasing as more 
small earthquakes occur, to a present value of about 22.5%. 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Sayfa 13 ---
 
From Earthquake Nowcasting to Earthquake Forecasting 
 
 
13 
 
Figure 3.  Current state of the target earthquake potential in the circle, representing the final 
slide of the movie that can be produced with the python code.  a)  Green bars represent the 
histogram of small earthquakes in the 45 complete earthquake cycles in the large region 
since 1970.  The Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) is derived from the histogram.  The 
magenta curves close to the red curve represent the 1s  deviation from the histogram, again 
using a bootstrap method.  The dashed blue line is the accumulation function, computed from 
equation (2).  b)  The red "thermometer" has the same value as the CDF (for easy reference), 
representing the EPS value.  The green "anti-thermometer" = 100% - EPS value (the red 
thermometer), and is the Survival Distribution Function (SDF) value.  c)  Total of small 
earthquakes following the 1994 Northridge earthquake up to the present time, 10/7/2025, 
color coded with more recent earthquakes in hotter colors. Large circle marks the epicenter 
of the Northridge mainshock. 
 
 
 
