
--- Sayfa 1 ---
Stochastic Chaos and Predictability in Laboratory Earthquakes
Adriano Gualandi∗
Istituto Nazionale di Geoﬁsica e Vulcanologia, Osservatorio Nazionale Terremoti, Rome, Italy
Davide Faranda
Laboratoire des Sciences du Climat et de l’Environnement, UMR 8212 CEA-CNRS-UVSQ,
Universit´e Paris-Saclay, IPSL, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
London Mathematical Laboratory, London, UK and
LMD/IPSL, Ecole Normale Superieure, PSL research University, Paris, France
Chris Marone
La Sapienza University of Rome, Department of Earth Sciences, Rome, Italy and
Pennsylvania State University, Geosciences, USA
Massimo Cocco
Istituto Nazionale di Geoﬁsica e Vulcanologia, Sezione Roma 1, Rome, Italy
Gianmarco Mengaldo
National University of Singapore, Department of Mechanical Engineering, College of Design and Engineering, Singapore
(Dated: April 7, 2022)
Laboratory earthquakes exhibit characteristics of a low-dimensional random attractor with a
dimension similar to that of natural slow earthquakes. A model of stochastic diﬀerential equations
based on rate- and state-dependent friction explains the laboratory observations. We study the
transition from stable sliding to stick-slip events and ﬁnd that aperiodic behavior can be explained
by small perturbations (< 1‰) in the stress state. Friction’s nonlinear nature ampliﬁes small scale
perturbations, reducing the predictability of the otherwise periodic macroscopic dynamics.
Friction is a complex nonlinear phenomenon that can
be modeled through many degrees of freedom (dofs) [1].
Nonetheless, laboratory studies of friction in geomaterials
led to the discovery of phenomenological laws to describe
the behavior of sliding surfaces with a limited number of
dofs. Rate- and state-dependent (RS) friction is today a
standard framework to describe friction in a wide range
of systems [2–5]. Within such formalism, the friction (µ)
depends on the sliding rate (v) and an internal state vari-
able (θ) that describes memory eﬀects. Stick-slip behav-
ior, similar to that for the seismic cycle for earthquake
faulting, is characterized by inter-seismic periods of load
increase followed by failure events with fast or slow un-
loading. Repeating failure events are explained by fault
healing and changes in frictional state θ [2, 6].
Stick-
slip laboratory experiments have been used extensively
to mimic the seismic cycle, for example, via a double di-
rect shear apparatus [7, 8]. Our goal is to see if slow and
fast labquakes live in the same phase space, and if they
have the same number of dofs observed for slow earth-
quakes in nature [9]. We use data from 14 stick-slip fric-
tion experiments conducted at diﬀerent imposed normal
stress (σn) conditions [10]. In the experiments, two lay-
ers of quartz powder are put under σn and then sheared
using an acrylic piston to modulate the elastic stiﬀness
around a value of k = 14.8 MPa/µm [7] (Fig. 1a). The
∗adriano.gualandi@ingv.it
applied normal stress is used as a control parameter to
systematically traverse the critical stability condition for
which the stiﬀness of the loading apparatus (k) is equal
to the critical stiﬀness of the system (kc ∝
1
σn ) [6, 11].
We observe both slow and fast stick-slip motion, with
slow/fast events occurring at low/high σn values. We de-
duce from the observations the number of dofs governing
the system at this transition regime and set up a model
with the appropriate number of phase space dimensions
to match laboratory data and explain the observed range
of labquake behaviors.
Each experiment includes several labquake cycles. We
use data in a 200 s time window (Fig. 1 and Tab. S1) in
order to have a suﬃcient number of cycles to perform dy-
namical systems analysis. We do not extend further this
window to limit friction evolution eﬀects associated with
shear fabric development and wear. Throughout each ex-
periment, the loading velocity v0 and the applied normal
stress σn are kept constant to some precision using servo-
control. Their mean values and standard deviations are
reported in Tab. S1. The nominal loading velocity was
v0 = 10 µm/s for all experiments.
Data are sampled
every ∆t = 0.01 s.
To infer the dimensionality of the system we use the
scalar time series of the frictional shear stress (τf, Fig. 1b-
c) since it is the measure with the smallest noise contri-
bution (Tab. S2). We calculate the Lyapunov dimension
(DKY ) via the Kaplan-Yorke conjecture [12], using the
Lyapunov spectrum calculated with the method of [13]
(Fig. 2a-b). We also estimate the information dimension
arXiv:2204.02763v1  [nlin.CD]  6 Apr 2022

--- Sayfa 2 ---
2
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIG. 1. (a) Sketch of the biaxial apparatus (BRAVA) used
for the experiments [7]. (b) Frictional shear stress time series
(τf). The system shows stick-slip behavior at diﬀerent values
of applied normal stress σn0. Red/green dots represent local
max/min values of τf.
Orange dots are the closest points
during a slip event to the average value of the shear stress ⟨τf⟩.
(c) Zoom of the black dashed box of panel (b). Interevent
times are taken between the orange dots to reduce sensitivity
to measurement noise associated with using max/min values
and deﬁne the returning of the trajectory to a well speciﬁed
region of the phase space (i.e., the hyperplane τf = ⟨τf⟩).
Note that the dynamics is richer when
k
kc ∼1 (intermediate
values of σn), without the presence of a single characteristic
labquake.
(D1) as the average instantaneous dimension, exploiting
recent results in extreme value theory applied to dynam-
ical systems [14, 15]. With both techniques we ﬁnd in
most cases relatively small dimensions (< 5) (Fig. 2b),
suggesting that a reduced order model may suﬃce to ex-
plain the observations. Details on the two approaches are
provided in section S1 of the Supplementary Material.
Remarkably, similar low dimensionality was observed for
slow slip events in nature [9], suggesting that it might be
a common feature of frictional faulting across multiple
spatio-temporal scales.
We can now seek a low-dimensional model to explain
the observations. For a spring-slider model obeying RS
friction, the number of variables needed to explain the
dynamics (i.e., the number of dofs) is equal to 2 plus the
number of internal state variables. We notice that the
dimension of the system tends to decrease with higher
σn, i.e. we observe smaller dimension for faster ruptures
(Fig. 2b). This observation points towards the fact that
inertial eﬀects can be neglected for the conditions of our
experiments. In fact, if inertial eﬀects were important, we
would expect fast labquakes to have a higher dimension
FIG. 2. (a) Lyapunov spectrum estimated from τf labora-
tory data. Legend is shared with panel (c). (b) Lyapunov
dimension (DKY ) and information dimension (D1) estimated
from τf time series. (c) and (d): bifurcation diagrams using
the interevent times of the previous (Tpre) and next (Tnext)
events.
FIG. 3. Time evolution of shear stress (τf, top row), normal
stress (σn, middle row), and layer thickness (H, bottom row)
for experiments b726 (ﬁrst column), b698 (second column)
and i417 (third column). Red line in the second row shows
cumulative sum of the de-meaned σn and clearly reveals per-
turbations associated with labquakes. Fourth column shows
zoom (blue dashed lines in column 3) of experiment i417. Note
drop in σn of ∼0.3 MPa and in H of ∼2 µm.
than slow events. We thus deem reasonable to introduce
a radiation damping approximation, where the inertial
term is replaced by a viscous term to represent energy
outﬂow as seismic waves [16].
This approximation re-
duces the number of dofs of the system by one. For a
non-inertial spring-slider system with RS friction and a
single state variable it is impossible to get a bifurcation
in the slip behavior: the phase space is 2-dimensional,
and a closed orbit cannot split into two slipping modes
without trajectory intersections occurring in the phase
space. An extra variable is needed.
In the classic spring-slider analysis, σn is assumed to be

--- Sayfa 3 ---
3
constant, but experimental data shows otherwise (Fig. 3).
We notice a clear variation in σn when τf drops, followed
by a relaxation to recover the imposed target value of
σn0. Also the layer thickness (H) varies systematically
over the labquake cycle, showing both a relaxation after a
shear stress drop and a clear reduction (i.e., compaction)
with time (Fig. 3). The variations in H are a function of
relaxation of shear-induced dilation [17], layer thinning
[18], and the drop in σn that occurs as the servo-control
system responds to the labquake. The exact partition
of layer compaction between these causes is unknown.
Thus, we account for normal stress variations and di-
lation using the formalism of [19] for porous materials,
where the porosity (φ) and the pore pressure (p) are in-
troduced as variables in the dynamics and linked to σn
via Terzaghi’s principle [20]. The only diﬀerence that we
introduce is the possibility for the characteristic distance
over which the porosity relaxes (Lφ) to diﬀer from the
RS friction characteristic slip distance (L). The model is
summarized by the following set of non-dimensional or-
dinary diﬀerential equations (ODE) (see section S2.1 for
its derivation):
˙x =
ex [(β1 −1) x (1 + λu) + y −u] + κ

v0
v∗−ex
−˙u 1+λy
1+λu
1 + λu + νex
(1a)
˙y = κ(v0
v∗
−ex) −νex ˙x
(1b)
˙z = −ρex(β2x + z)
(1c)
˙u = −α −γu + ˙z
(1d)
The
state
vector
ζ,
i.e.
that
vector
that
fully
characterizes
the
state
of
the
system,
is
made of the non-dimensional variables [x, y, z, u]
=
[ln

v
v∗

, τf −τ0
aσn0 ,
1
λβσn0 (φ −φ0) , −1
λ
p
σn0 ], where v∗is a
reference sliding velocity, τ0 = µ0σn0 is the product of the
reference friction coeﬃcient µ0 and the reference normal
stress σn0, λ is equal to
a
µ0 with a being the RS direct
eﬀect parameter (i.e., the instantaneous response of the
friction coeﬃcient to a sudden step in the sliding veloc-
ity), β is the product of the elastic component of porosity
and the combined compressibility of the ﬂuid (air) in the
pores and the elastic pores, and φ0 is a reference poros-
ity. The other parameters appearing in system (1) are the
ratio between the RS evolutionary and direct eﬀect pa-
rameters β1 = b
a, the non-dimensional spring stiﬀness κ,
viscous parameter ν, dilatancy coeﬃcient β2, pore pres-
sure in the surrounding α, diﬀusivity γ, and the ratio
ρ =
L
Lφ .
We adopt values for the frictional parameters derived
from [7] who used the same material as for our tests.
We adjust the values of β2, γ, ρ and ν in order to repro-
duce the period doubling as observed in our experiments
(Fig. 1, section S2.2 and Tab. S4).
For the used pa-
rameters, the solution of the ODE system does not show
chaotic behavior, and the shear stress drops repeat pe-
riodically with either a single characteristic labquake or
a characteristic sequence of slow and fast labquakes in a
row (Fig. S2). In other words, with the adopted param-
eters the system exhibits a cyclic attractor and a limit
cycle. We notice that a quasi-static spring-slider system
with two RS state variables is a particular case of the
set of ODE previously derived (see section S2.3). Such a
system shows the typical behavior of the route to chaos
when suﬃciently reducing the stiﬀness of the system κ
(i.e., when increasing the reference normal stress σn0)
[21]. The range of values for which deterministic chaos
is observed is quite narrow (0.06840 ≲κ ≲0.06864),
and further reducing κ leads to unstable behavior and
divergence of the solution [21]. We ﬁnd chaotic behav-
ior for the system of eqs. (1) for only a narrow range of
σn0 values. The window over which such chaotic behav-
ior is observed depends on the selected parameters. For
the adopted parameters, such range is smaller than the
minimum step in σn0, so we do not further investigate
this matter here, but we do not exclude that part of the
observed complexity may be due to this transition to de-
terministic chaos. We note that the radiation damping
term allows one to explore a larger range of values with
respect to the quasi-static case, and the modiﬁcations in-
troduced in system (1) allow us to reproduce the major
feature of the data consisting in period doubling followed
by a return to a single characteristic labquake cycle as
σn0 increases (Fig. S2). To obtain these results we had
to use a radiation damping term 35 times larger than
what is typically adopted to simulate earthquakes. The
classically adopted value assumes an inﬁnite fault plane
in an elastic full space and radiation due only to out-
going planar shear waves [16]. These assumptions may
be false in laboratory samples of few cm, and the results
suggest that in the laboratory a larger fraction of energy
is dissipated with respect to this idealized condition.
Period doubling in the τf time series was obtained by
[10] using a boundary integral software for seismic cycle
simulations. Such model contains many more dofs with
respect to the simple spring-slider model that we have
implemented, and many more than those deducible from
the observed time series. Nonetheless, our model better
describes the actual shape of the frictional shear stress
time series (compare Figs. S2a and S3 with Fig. 1b), re-
produces the bifurcation at the same normal stress val-
ues actually imposed in the laboratory, and takes into
account variations in normal stress (even if not perfectly,
see Fig. S4). We thus prefer to use the low-dimensional
model to describe the observations.
We further notice that, diﬀerently from the ODE sim-
ulations, the laboratory data are not exactly periodic.
This can be seen either directly from the time series of
τf, or from Fig. 2 where we plot for each event the time to
the next event (Tnext) vs the time since the previous event
(Tpre) (panel c) and the ratio
Tpre
Tnext as a function of σn0
(panel d). In those plots we clearly see a spread of points
around the values that would represent periodic cycles of

--- Sayfa 4 ---
4
loading and failure. Another way to measure the aperiod-
icity of the cycles is via the Coeﬃcient of Variation (CV),
deﬁned as the ratio between the standard deviation and
the mean of the observed interevent times. The observed
CV are reported in Fig. S5a. Experiments close to the
transition regime (i.e.,
k
kc ∼1) show high CVs, indicat-
ing a higher complexity than experiments more distant
from such a critical state. Nonetheless, also experiments
with a single characteristic labquake do not have a null
CV. We notice that τf and σn are subject to noise ﬂuc-
tuations (Fig. 3). These ﬂuctuations can be described by
a Wiener process WT of intensity ετf and εσn, respec-
tively. We estimate these intensities using the standard
deviation of the time series relative to the experiment at
σn0 = 13.6 MPa. In particular, we use ετf = std(τf −˜τf)
and εσn = std(σn), where ˜τf is a cubic spline approxima-
tion used to smooth the time series and ﬁlter out the low
frequencies. We obtain values of ετf ≃0.004 MPa and
εσn ≃0.006 MPa. Adding only observational noise to
the ODE simulations does not explain the observed CV
variability (Fig. S6). Introducing such noises in terms
of y and u leads to a set of stochastic diﬀerential equa-
tions (SDE) with eqs. (1b) and (1d) being modiﬁed into
(section S2.1):
dy =

κ
v0
v∗
−ex

−νex ˙x

dT + εydWT
(2a)
du = [−α −γu + ˙z] dT + εudWT
(2b)
The simulated time series are shown in Fig. S7. Of
course, also v and φ (i.e., x and z) may be subject to
noise that can perturb the dynamics of the system. Con-
trary to τf and σn, we do not directly measure them.
Before introducing further complications, we consider the
noises on σn and τf as the most relevant ones. To mimic
the laboratory time series, we ﬁnally add measurement
noise of ετf to the SDE generated τf time series (Fig. 4a).
The Lyapunov spectrum, the system dimension, and the
interevent times are shown in Figs. 4b-e. We ﬁnd a Lya-
punov spectrum similar to the one derived from the data,
DKY between 3 and 4, and both DKY and D1 decreasing
with increasing σn0 (see Fig. 2b for comparison). Fur-
thermore, in the bifurcation diagrams we see a spread
similar to the one observed in the laboratory time series.
This result suggests that the aperiodicities in the return-
ing time of laboratory earthquakes (of any type, either
slow or fast or mixed) could be the result of a stochastic
noise component that enters the dynamics and gets am-
pliﬁed due to the nonlinearities of the equations. As a
consequence, with the current available set up, stick-slip
cycles near the critical transition regime obtained from
laboratory experiments can be reproducible only statis-
tically and not deterministically, in the sense that, with
the same rocks and conditions applied, we can expect to
reproduce similar average interevent times and standard
deviations, but not the same exact sequence of ruptures.
Similar observations were made for a diﬀerent frictional
FIG. 4.
(a) Frictional shear stress τf simulated using the
system of SDE with stochastic terms added to y and u, and
addition of observational noise ετf on τf.
Imposed σn0 to
mimic experiments b726, b698, b728, b721 and i417. (b)-(e):
As Fig. 2, but for SDE simulated time series with stochastic
terms added to y and u and the addition of observational
noise ετf to τf.
system of labquakes [22], and this type of feedback be-
tween the apparatus’ vibrations and the system dynamics
has been documented for turbulent ﬂows [14]. These be-
haviors may be a more general characteristic of nonlinear
frictional systems.
Our results point towards the existence of a random
attractor (Fig. 5) to describe the seismic cycle: minimal
variations of the order of less than 1‰ on the shear and
normal stresses applied to the fault (intended as the ex-
perimental frictional interface) inﬂuence the large scale
dynamics and the recurrence time of a rupture, induc-
ing CV of a few percent points (> 3%, Fig. S5a). The
implications on natural faults are quite relevant.
At
seismogenic depths (∼10 km), variations of less than
1‰ of the lithostatic stress would correspond to hun-
dreds of kPa or less. Possible causes that can generate
stress perturbations of 10-100 kPa are: other tectonic
sources (with both static and dynamic stress variations
[23]), magmatic intrusions in volcano-tectonic environ-

--- Sayfa 5 ---
5
ments [24], surface atmospheric loading [25, 26], anthro-
pogenic activity, and solid tides [27]. The laboratory ex-
periments here considered were conducted to explore the
transition regime
k
kc ∼1, which corresponds to regions of
transition between linearly stable to unstable behavior.
Such a transition zone might be similar to the one where
episodic tremors are observed in nature, since we found
that labquakes at the transition regime have dimension
similar to the one of slow earthquakes in Cascadia [9].
Given that kc depends on σn [6], variations εσn can in-
ﬂuence the stability of the system, making it sensitive to
small stress perturbations. This suggests that we should
not treat faults as isolated systems, especially when mod-
eling the limits of the seismogenic zone in nature.
The lack of an appropriate deterministic description of
all the aforementioned stress perturbations may explain
why earthquake forecast is a diﬃcult task and statistical
methods are used [28, 29]. Nonetheless, the addition of
the available physical information is a fundamental as-
pect to improve our forecasts. For example, a commonly
used statistical distribution to describe the recurrence of
a characteristic earthquake is the one derived from the
study of a Brownian Relaxation Oscillator (BRO). This
is a time and slip predictable stick-slip system subject to
a stochastic perturbation of its “load state”. The distri-
bution that describes the expected waiting time of the
next event, given the (physical) knowledge of the cur-
rent “load state” of the system, is the so-called Brownian
Passage Time (BPT) distribution [30]. Our results rely-
ing on laboratory experiments may explain why a mix of
physical knowledge and statistical methods like those ob-
tained with a BPT model are often used for earthquakes
forecast [31]. Compared to the BRO, here we have in-
troduced the stochastic perturbations under a more rig-
orous physical description of friction, i.e. under the RS
framework using two length-scale parameters.
Despite
a low average dimension of the attractor, the maximum
instantaneous dimension deduced from the data ranges
from ∼12 (for experiment b727, σn0 = 24.017 MPa) to
∼47 (for experiment b695, σn0 = 17.909 MPa). This
suggests that extra dofs are needed to fully characterize
the dynamics in some regions of the phase space. Supply-
ing a stochastic term to the dynamics is an admittance
of our ignorance on how to monitor and describe these
extra dofs [32]. The maximum instantaneous dimension
increases from ∼2 to ∼38 when perturbing the dynam-
ics with a stochastic term, and it goes up to ∼83 when
introducing also observational noise. The model we pro-
pose is one of the possible candidates and it is based on
the modelling of small scale ﬂuctuations via stochastic
terms. This choice is not unique and deterministic de-
scriptions could hold as well. Whether solids or ﬂuids
should be phenomenologically modelled via stochastic or
deterministic equations is still an open problem [33, 34]
which aﬀects, for example, the quality of weather fore-
casts and climate predictions [35]. Furthermore, another
limitation may come from the fact that instabilities are
introduced by inertial eﬀects, that certainly play a signif-
icant role for natural earthquakes. Despite these limita-
tions, the proposed description constitutes a step forward
towards a model that can explain major features of the
laboratory shear stress time series and reconcile the num-
ber of dofs that can be deduced from the observations.
Furthermore, this model can explain ﬂuctuations of the
labquakes stress drop caused by the inclusion of stochas-
tic perturbations to the dynamics, thus contributing to
the debate on stress drop scaling with earthquake size
[36]. Thanks to the ODE and SDE models, we can esti-
mate the eﬀect of the stochastic term to the predictability
of the dynamics. We calculate the Lyapunov time (tLyap)
using the maximum Lyapunov exponent of the spectrum
obtained from clean time series, i.e. without additional
observational noise (Figs. S5b-c). The limited tLyap for
ODE models is due to the ﬁnite ∆t. For SDE models
tLyap < 1 s. While there exist model-free techniques ca-
pable of predicting the behavior of chaotic systems up to
8tLyap into the future [37], as future steps we envision the
application of data assimilation approaches that can use
the model here presented to advance the state of the sys-
tem. Similar to weather forecast, we think that ensemble
forecast is the most reasonable way to assess the future
state of the system because of the unavoidable stochastic
terms that aﬀect the dynamics. We do not exclude that
this model may also be used to improve laboratory earth-
quakes forecast with machine learning approaches, gen-
erating at will synthetic data that resembles the major
characteristics of the observed time series and reducing
the shortcoming of limited training datasets.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Carolina Giorgetti, Luca Dal Zilio, Giacomo
Pozzi, Lauro Chiaraluce and Marco Maria Scuderi for
insightful discussions.
[1] M. Urbakh, J. Klafter, and J. Gourdon, D. Israelachvili,
The nonlinear nature of friction, Nature 430, 525–528
(2004).
[2] J. Dieterich, Modeling of rock friction, 1, experimental
results and constitutive equations, J. Geophys. Res. 8,
2161 (1979).
[3] T. Baumberger and C. Caroli, Solid friction from
stick–slip down to pinning and aging, Advances in
Physics 55, 279 (2006).
[4] Q. Li, T. Tullis, D. Goldsby, and R. Carpick, Frictional
ageing from interfacial bonding and the origins of rate
and state friction, Nature 480, 233 (2011).

--- Sayfa 6 ---
6
FIG. 5. Phase space subregion xyu of the ODE (top) and SDE (bottom) simulations for the experiments b726, b698, b728,
b721 and i417.
[5] C. Scholz, The Mechanics of Earthquakes and Faulting,
3rd ed. (Cambridge University Press, 2019).
[6] J. Rice and L. Ruina, Stability of steady frictional slip-
ping, J. Appl. Mech. 50, 343 (1983).
[7] E. Tinti, M. Scuderi, L. Scognamiglio, G. Di Stefano,
C. Marone, and C. Collettini, On the evolution of elastic
properties during laboratory stick-slip experiments span-
ning the transition from slow slip to dynamic rupture, J.
Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 121, 8569 (2016).
[8] J. Leeman, C. Marone, and D. Saﬀer, Frictional mechan-
ics of slow earthquakes, J. of Geophys. Res. 123 (2018).
[9] A. Gualandi, J.-P. Avouac, S. Michel, and D. Faranda,
The predictable chaos of slow earthquakes, Sci. Adv. 6
(2020).
[10] D. Mele Veedu, C. Giorgetti, M. Scuderi, S. Barbot,
C. Marone, and C. Collettini, Bifurcations at the stability
transition of earthquake faulting, Geophysical Research
Letters 47 (2020).
[11] J.-C. Gu, J. Rice, A. Ruina, and S. Tse, Slip motion and
stability of a single degree of freedom elastic system with
rate and state dependent friction, J. Mech. Phys. Solids
32, 167 (1984).
[12] J. Kaplan and J. Yorke, Chaotic behavior of multidimen-
sional diﬀerence equations, peitgen, h. o.; walther, h. o.
ed., Functional Diﬀerential Equations and the Approx-
imation of Fixed Points. Lecture Notes in Mathematics
(Springer, p. 204–227, 1979).
[13] M. Sano and Y. Sawada, Measurement of the lyapunov
spectrum from a chaotic time series, Physical Review Let-
ters 55, 1082 (1985).
[14] D. Faranda,
Y. Sato,
B. Saint-Michel,
C. Wiertel,
V. Padilla, B. Dubrulle, and F. Daviaud, Stochastic chaos
in a turbulent swirling ﬂow, Physical Review Letters 119
(2017).
[15] D. Faranda, G. Messori, and P. Yiou, Dynamical proxies
of north atlantic predictability and extremes, Scientiﬁc
Reports 7 (2017).
[16] J. Rice, Spatio-temporal complexity of slip on a fault, J.
of Geophys. Res. 98, 9885 (1993).
[17] C. Marone, C. Raleigh, and C. Scholz, Frictional behavior
and constitutive modeling of simulated fault gouge, J. of
Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 95, 7007 (1990).
[18] D. Scott, C. Marone, and C. Sammis, The apparent fric-
tion of granular fault gouge in sheared layers, J. of Geoph.
Res. 99, 7231 (1994).
[19] P. Segall and J. Rice, Dilatancy, compaction, and slip in-
stability of a ﬂuid-inﬁltrated fault, Journal of Geophysi-
cal Research 100, 22155 (1995).
[20] K. Terzaghi, Erdbaumechanik auf bodenphysikalischer
grundlage (Wien: F. Deuticke, 1925).
[21] T. Becker, Deterministic Chaos in two State-variable
Friction Sliders and the Eﬀects of Elastic Interactions,
Geocomplexitiy and the Physics of Earthquakes, Geo-
physical Monograph 120 (AGU, 2000).
[22] S. Karner and C. Marone, Eﬀects of Loading Rate and
Normal Stress on Stress Drop and Stick-slip Recurrence
Interval, Geocomplexitiy and the Physics of Earthquakes,
Geophysical Monograph 120 (AGU, 2000).
[23] A. Freed, Earthquake triggering by static, dynamic, and
postseismic stress transfer, Annual Review of Earth and
Planetary Sciences 33, 335 (2005).
[24] K. Chen, J. Smith, J. Avouac, Z. Liu, Y. Song, and
A. Gualandi, Triggering of the mw 7.2 hawaii earthquake
of 4 may 2018 by a dike intrusion, Geophysical Research
Letters 46, 2503 (2019).
[25] N. D’Agostino, F. Silverii, O. Amoroso, V. Convertito,
F. Fiorillo, G. Ventafridda, and A. Zollo, Crustal defor-
mation andseismicity modulated by groundwaterrecharge
of karst aquifers, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 45, 12253
(2018).
[26] F. Pintori, E. Serpelloni, L. Longuevergne, A. Garcia,
L. Faenza, L. D’Alberto, A. Gualandi, and M. Belar-
dinelli, Mechanical response of shallow crust to ground-
water storage variations:
Inferences from deformation
and seismic observations in the eastern southern alps,
italy, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 126 (2021).
[27] J. Rubinstein, M. La Rocca, J. Vidale, K. Creager, and
A. Wech, Tidal modulation of nonvolcanic tremor, Sci-
ence 319, 186 (2008).
[28] I. Main, Statistical physics, seismogenesis, and seismic
hazard, Reviews of Geophysics 34, 433 (1996).

--- Sayfa 7 ---
7
[29] I. Main, Earthquake prediction:
Concluding remarks,
Nature (1999).
[30] M. Matthews, W. Ellsworth, and P. Reasenberg, A brow-
nian model for recurrent earthquakes, Bulletin of the
Seismological Society of America 92, 2233 (2002).
[31] O. Y., Statistics of earthquake activity:
Models and
methods for earthquake predictability studies, Annu.
Rev. Earth Planet. Sci. 45, 497 (2017).
[32] D. Vere-Jones, Y. Ben-Zion, and R. Z´u˜niga, Statistical
seismology, Pure appl. geophys. 162, 1023 (2005).
[33] S. Nath, A. Raj, K. Thingbaijam, and A. Kumar, Ground
motion synthesis and seismic scenario in guwahati city—a
stochastic approach, Seismological Research Letters 80,
233 (2009).
[34] A. Cruzeiro, Stochastic approaches to deterministic ﬂuid
dynamics: A selective review, Water 12, 864 (2020).
[35] T. Palmer, Stochastic weather and climate models, Na-
ture Reviews Physics 1, 463 (2019).
[36] M. Cocco, E. Tinti, and A. Cirella, On the scale depen-
dence of earthquake stress drop, Journal of Seismology
20 (2016).
[37] J. Pathak, B. Hunt, M. Girvan, Z. Lu, and E. Ott, Model-
free prediction of large spatiotemporally chaotic systems
from data: A reservoir computing approach, Physical Re-
view Letters 120 (2018).
