
--- Sayfa 1 ---
Forecasting the rates of future aftershocks of all
generations is essential to develop better earthquake
forecast models
Shyam Nandan1, Guy Ouillon2, Didier Sornette3, Stefan Wiemer1
1ETH Zürich, Swiss Seismological Service, Sonneggstrasse 5, 8092 Zürich, Switzerland
2Lithophyse, 4 rue de l’Ancien Sénat, 06300 Nice, France
3ETH Zürich, Department of Management, Technology and Economics, Scheuchzerstrasse 7, 8092
Zürich, Switzerland
Corresponding author: Shyam Nandan (shyam4iiser@gmail.com)
Key Points:
1.
Rigorous pseudo-prospective experiments reveal the forecasting prowess of the ETAS model
with spatially variable parameters over the current state of the art smoothed seismicity
models.
2.
Smoothed seismicity models that account for the rates of future aftershocks of all generations
can have superior forecasting performance relative to only background seismicity-based
models.
3.
Accounting for spatial variation of parameters of the ETAS model can lead to superior
forecasting performance compared to ETAS models with spatially invariant parameters.

--- Sayfa 2 ---
Abstract:
Currently, one of the best performing and most popular earthquake forecasting models rely on the
working hypothesis that: “locations of past background earthquakes reveal the probable location of
future seismicity”. As an alternative, we present a class of smoothed seismicity models (SSMs) based
on the principles of the Epidemic  Type Aftershock Sequence (ETAS) model, which forecast the
location, time and magnitude of all future earthquakes using the estimates of the background
seismicity rate and the rates of future aftershocks of all generations. Using the Californian earthquake
catalog, we formulate six controlled pseudo-prospective experiments with different combination of
three target magnitude thresholds: 2.95, 3.95 or 4.95 and two forecasting time horizons: 1 or 5 year.
In these experiments, we compare the performance of:(1) ETAS model with spatially homogenous
parameters or GETAS (2) ETAS model with spatially variable parameters or SVETAS (3) three
declustering based SSMs (4) a simple SSM based on undeclustered data and (5) a model based on
strain rate data, in forecasting the location and magnitude of all (undeclustered) target earthquakes
during many testing periods. In all conducted experiments, the SVETAS model comes out with
consistent superiority compared to all the competing models. Consistently better performance of
SVETAS model with respect to declustering based SSMs highlights the importance of forecasting the
future aftershocks of all generations for developing better earthquake forecasting models. Among the
two ETAS models themselves, accounting for the optimal spatial variation of the parameters leads to
strong and statistically significant improvements in forecasting performance.
1 Introduction
With the recognition of our limited and fragmentary knowledge of the processes leading to
seismogenesis, a prominent shift in the view of the seismological community has occurred, with a
concentrated focus on earthquake forecasting instead of prediction [Jordan and Jones, 2010]. As a
result, significant efforts have been invested in devising and validating models that yield probabilities
of earthquake occurrence within given space-time-magnitude windows. The recent Regional

--- Sayfa 3 ---
Earthquake Likelihood Models (RELM) experiment [Schorlemmer and Gerstenberger, 2007; Field,
2007], which is now being continued by the Collaboratory for the Study of Earthquake Predictability
(CSEP) [Werner et al., 2010; Schorlemmer et al., 2010b; Zechar et al., 2010], serves as an excellent
example of this concentrated effort. The success of RELM experiments and CSEP has been in
bringing the earthquake forecasting research on the centre stage by providing a unique platform for
systematically comparing predictive performances of various seismicity models. A significant fraction
of the models considered during the first RELM experiments and by CSEP are smoothed seismicity
models or SSMs, which rely on the working hypothesis that the “spatial location and magnitude
distribution of the past earthquakes reveal the probable location and size of the future events”.
Different researchers have used this idea in different ways to construct coarse-grained forecasts of
future earthquakes [Zechar et al., 2013; Schorlemmer et al., 2010a]. Some simply counted the total
seismicity rate in predefined rectangular cells and scaled it appropriately to issue the forecasts for the
required magnitude thresholds [Ebel et al. 2007; Wiemer and Schorlemmer, 2007]. Others employed
relatively sophisticated kernel-based smoothing techniques of the location of past earthquakes to
obtain a forecast of the future seismicity rate [Werner et al., 2011; Zechar and Jordan, 2010; Eberhard
et al., 2012]. Some others even added an extra layer of sophistication by declustering the available
training catalogues before smoothing and scaling [Helmstetter et al., 2007; Werner et al., 2011;
Helmstetter and Werner, 2014; Kagan and Jackson, 2011]. The results of the RELM experiments
[Zechar et al., 2013; Rhoades et al., 2014] have indicated that the smoothed seismicity approach based
on the declustered earthquake catalogs (in particular, the model proposed by Helmstetter et al. [2007],
which we will refer to as D-HKJ from now on) is the most informative not only when the competing
models are other smoothed seismicity methods, but also when models use relevant strain and mapped
fault information. However, one five-year experiment is not enough to reach stable conclusions about
the best performing model. As a result, others have pursued the systematic testing and comparison of
this smoothed seismicity approach. For instance, Stader et al. [2017] found that even though the
model of Helmstetter et al. [2007] failed some consistency tests, particularly the N-test, the model still
outperformed the physics-based models such as Uniform California Earthquake Rupture Forecast

--- Sayfa 4 ---
(UCERF2) and National Seismic Hazard Mapping (NSHM) forecasts in several retrospective
experiments with different time horizons.
Following the success of the D-HKJ model in the first RELM experiments, other researchers have
proposed systematic improvements to this method, including incorporation of spatially variable
estimates of b-values [Hiemer and Kamer, 2016], model hybridization [Rhoades et al., 2014; Rhoades
et al., 2017; Steacy et al., 2013] and so on.
The success of SSMs that decluster especially compared to SSMs that do not, indicates that only the
location of “background” earthquakes is important when forecasting the location of future large (ܯ≥
5) earthquakes at least on a time scale of 5 years. Indeed, this requires us to reformulate the
aforementioned working hypothesis to: “locations of the past background earthquakes reveal the
probable location of future seismicity”.
In this paper, we explore an alternative class of smoothed seismicity models that are based on the
principles of the Epidemic Type Aftershock Sequence (ETAS) model, which have been widely used
in the literature to model short-term (on order of days to weeks) fluctuations in the seismicity rate
following a large earthquake [Werner et al., 2011; Console et al., 2007; Iwata, 2010; Zhuang et al.,
2002; Helmstetter and Sornette, 2002a, 2002b, 2003a and 2003b; Helmstetter et al., 2003; Daley and
Vere-Jones, 2002; Ogata, 2011]. We aim to investigate if the same model can be extended to make
forecasts for longer forecasting horizons (5 years, for instance, as in the RELM experiments). The
ETAS models differ from the declustering based SSMs in the key idea that they not only utilise the
estimates of the background seismicity rate based on the past catalogue but also parametric equations
to forecast the rates of future aftershocks. We consider two versions of the ETAS model: one using a
global set of parameters, and another one with spatially variable parameters. We have already
proposed an objective framework to obtain spatially variable parameters of the ETAS model in
Nandan et al. [2017], where we justified the parametric complexity of this model using the Bayesian
Information Criterion. However, it remains to be checked if this “optimally” complex ETAS model
can indeed outperform its more straightforward counterpart in a controlled pseudo-prospective
experiment. For reference, we also compare the performance of these ETAS based models to three

--- Sayfa 5 ---
declustering based SSMs [Werner et al., 2011; Helmstetter et al., 2007; Zaliapin et al., 2008], a simple
SSM based on undeclustered past earthquake catalog [Zechar and Jordan, 2010], and a model based
on strain rate data [Bird and Liu, 2007]. In order to ascertain if the derived conclusions in this study
are robust with respect to the starting year of the testing period (1999, 2000,…,2016), its duration (1
or 5 year) and minimum magnitude threshold of target earthquakes (2.95, 3.95 or 4.95), we perform
numerous pseudo-prospective experiments with different combinations of these “hyper parameters”.
In these experiments, the competing models use the earthquake data during the training period to
forecast the location and magnitude of all earthquakes, not just some selected earthquakes based on
predefined declustering criteria, during the testing period defined using the above mentioned hyper
parameters.
The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we describe the data used in this study along with
other essential and necessary considerations before calibration of the SSMs. Then, in section 3, we
describe in detail the formulations of the six competing models. Further, we present and discuss the
results of the pseudo-prospective experiments conducted in section 4. Finally, section 5 outlines our
conclusions. As this paper relies on extensive use of acronyms, we have given the provided the
definition of all the important acronyms in Table 1.
2 Data
The pseudo-prospective experiments undertaken in this study focus on testing the performance of the
smoothed seismicity models in and around the state of California. We use the earthquake catalogue
from the Advanced National Seismic System (ANSS) database that includes earthquakes in this
region (see Figure 1). More specifically, we use the collection polygon defined for the Regional
Earthquake Likelihood Model (RELM) experiment [Schorlemmer and Gerstenberger, 2007] as the
spatial boundary of the catalogue.
Completeness of the earthquake catalogue is an essential factor for the construction of the smoothed
seismicity models. Its influence is two folds. First, it affects the calibration of the models, thereby
influencing the rate forecasts that are obtained. For instance, in the case of ETAS based models,

--- Sayfa 6 ---
incorrect estimates of the magnitude of completeness (ܯ௖) can lead to biased estimates of parameters
and consequently to biased rate forecasts [Seif et al., 2016]. Second, if one aims to forecast the rate of
seismicity at any specific target magnitude threshold (say ܯ௧), using the earthquakes larger than ܯ௖ in
the training catalog, the smoothed seismicity forecasts need to be scaled by a factor of 10ି௕(ெ೟ିெ೎),
where b is the exponent of the Gutenberg-Richter (GR) law. The scaling essentially assumes that the
GR law is valid above the chosen magnitude of completeness. For an incorrect choice of ܯ௖ for the
training catalog, the scaling may lead to inappropriate forecasts. For the area under study, Nandan et
al. [2017] found that the ANSS catalog is complete for ܯ≥2.95 during the years 1981 to 2016. This
choice of ܯ௖= 2.95 is justified in Nandan et al. [2017] by estimating independent temporal and
spatial variation of magnitudes of completeness in the study region. However, it is important to note
that even though the choice of ܯ௖= 2.95 is rather conservative for most of the study region and time
periods, some important regions such as offshore Mendocino and some important time periods such as
several days following the largest earthquakes in the catalog may violate this assumption. One way to
remedy to such a problem could be to use ܯ௖ values larger than 2.95. However, it comes at the cost of
much less resolved smoothed seismicity models due to a lack of coverage resulting from the
dwindling number of earthquakes with an increasing magnitude of completeness. Thus, we fix the
magnitude of completeness to 2.95 for all forecasting experiments conducted in this study.
For all the models appraised here, we also considered an auxiliary catalogue (ܯ≥2.95), within the
collection polygon and time period 1971 to 1981 (see Figure 1). The role of earthquakes in this
auxiliary catalog is to act only as parents of the earthquakes in the primary catalog. The consideration
of such an auxiliary catalog is especially relevant for the calibration of ETAS based models (see
Wang et al., [2010] for instance), to avoid the situation that earthquakes in the early part of the
primary catalog might systematically appear as orphans (i.e. background events) due to the artificial
lack of any ancestor.
3 Method
3.1 Pseudo-prospective forecasting experiments:

--- Sayfa 7 ---
We perform 6 sets of pseudo-prospective tests. In each of these experiments, we define a training
period and correspondingly a training catalogue which is used to construct forecasts for the testing
period. The testing period is always a period immediately following the training period. Earthquakes
in the testing period are used to evaluate the performance of the forecasts constructed using different
models. In all the forecasting experiments conducted in this study, the earthquakes within the
predefined Collection polygon are used for model construction. The collection polygon encloses a
smaller predefined polygon called a testing polygon, which is divided into 0.1°ܺ 0.1° grid cells.
The forecasts of all models during any testing period are issued on these testing grid cells in terms of
expected number of earthquakes during the predefined testing period in 0.1-unit magnitude bins. To
be strictly consistent with the RELM experiments, we use the same grid centers (7682 in total) as used
by Zechar et al. [2013]. In the following, we give a detailed set-up of the 6 experiments conducted in
this study.
1.
Experiment 1: The five-year-long experiments start with the testing period [1999, 2003].
This testing time interval is then systematically shifted by one year to [2000, 2004] and so on
until the final testing period [2012, 2016] is reached. With each one-year shift of the testing
period, we increase the duration of the training catalogue by one year. In this experiment, the
different models forecast the rate of earthquakes with ܯ௧≥4.95 in 0.1-unit magnitude bins.
2.
Experiment 2: Same as Experiment 1 except that the models forecast the rate of earthquakes
with ܯ௧≥3.95 in 0.1-unit magnitude bins.
3.
Experiment 3: Same as Experiments 1 and 2 except that the different models forecast the rate
of earthquakes with ܯ௧≥2.95 in 0.1-unit magnitude bins.
4.
Experiment 4: These one-year long experiments start with the testing period [1999, 2000).
Note that the different closing bracket indicates that the year 2000 is not included in the
testing period. This testing time interval is then systematically shifted by one year to [2000,
2001) and so on until the final testing period [2016, 2017) is reached. With each one-year
shift of the testing period, we increase the duration of the training catalogue by one year. In

--- Sayfa 8 ---
this experiment, the different models forecast the rate of earthquakes with ܯ௧≥4.95 in 0.1-
unit magnitude bins.
5.
Experiment 5: Same as Experiment 4 except that the different models forecast the rate of
earthquakes with ܯ௧≥3.95 in 0.1-unit magnitude bins.
6.
Experiment 6: Same as Experiment 4 and 5 except that the different models forecast the rate
of earthquakes with ܯ≥2.95 in 0.1-unit magnitude bins.
The performance of the models is evaluated based on the true location and magnitude of the
earthquakes that occurred during the testing period, which are shown in Figure 1.
3.2 Competing models
We use four classes of competing smoothed seismicity models: (i) ETAS based models; (ii)
declustering based models; (iii) a simple smoothed seismicity model and (iv) a model based on strain
data. For all these models, we assume that the magnitudes of the forecasted earthquakes follow the
GR law with a uniform b-value (b=1).
3.2.1 ETAS based models:
3.2.1.1 ETAS model with a global set of parameters (GETAS model)
In the ETAS model, the seismicity rate, λ(t, x, y|H୲), at any time t and location (x, y) is conditional
upon the history of seismicity, H୲, up to t. λ(t, x, y|H୲) is explicitly formulated as:
ߣ(ݐ, ݔ, ݕ|ܪ௧) = ߤ+ ෍݃
(ݐ−ݐ௜, ݔ−ݔ௜, ݕ−ݕ௜,݉
௜)
௜:௧೔ழ௧
(1)
In the above formulation, λ(t, x, y|H୲) depends on two components: the background intensity function
μ, and the triggering function, g(t −t୧,x −x୧, y −y୧, m୧), which is explicitly formulated as:݃
(ݐ−ݐ௜, ݔ−ݔ௜, ݕ−ݕ௜,݉
௜) =
ܭ݁ݔ݌[ܽ(݉
௜−ܯ௖)]{ݐ−ݐ௜+ܿ}ିଵିఠ
{(ݔ−ݔ௜)ଶ+ (ݕ−ݕ௜)ଶ+݀݁
ݔ݌[ߛ(݉
௜−ܯ଴)]}ଵାఘ
(2)
{μ, K, a, c, ω, d, γ, ρ} is the set of parameters that characterise the ETAS model. We obtain the global
estimate of these parameters using the Expectation Maximization (EM) formulation proposed by
Veen and Schoenberg [2008]. On calibrating the GETAS model on the primary earthquake catalogue

--- Sayfa 9 ---
(shown in Figure 1) covering the entire period (1981-2017), we find: ߤ= 2.31 ×
10ି଻earthquakes kmିଶ dayିଵ, ܭ= 3.95 × 10ିସ,ܽ
= 1.60,ܿ
= 1.74 × 10ିଶday,߱
= 0.17,݀
=
0.24 kmଶ, ߛ= 1.11, ߩ= 0.53.
However, to ensure the sanctity of the pseudo-prospective experiments, the process of calibration of
the ETAS model is repeated for all the training catalogues.
3.2.1.2 ETAS model with spatially variable parameters (SVETAS model)
The parameters of the ETAS model defined in the previous section may or may not feature spatial
variation, but the former seems more likely considering that these parameters are possibly the
manifestations of the local physical properties of the crust, which exhibit spatial variability.
Nevertheless, these parameters have been generally assumed to be spatially invariant in most of the
literature on the ETAS model, primarily for reasons of computational simplicity.
Recently, we introduced an objective method to invert spatially variable parameters of the ETAS
model [Nandan et al., 2017]. We found that the three parameters K,ܽ
 and ߤ show substantial spatial
variation, which could be explained by the spatial variation of the surface heat flow in the study
region. In Nandan et al. [2017], however, we considered the parameters of the temporal (Omori) and
spatial kernels to be spatially invariant for reasons of computational and mathematical simplicity. In
the present work, we have extended our previous method to invert the spatial variation of the Omori
parameters as well, while still assuming the parameters of the spatial kernel to be spatially invariant
for reasons of computational simplicity. In the following, we give a summary of the inversion
algorithm that we use to obtain the spatial variation of the ETAS parameters and adopt the same
representation as in Nandan et al. [2017].
1.
We first assume that the number of spatial Voronoi partitions (i.e. cells) that are necessary to
capture the spatial variation of the parameters {μ, K, a, c, ω} is q. In each of these q partitions,
S = {Sଵ, Sଶ, Sଷ, … , S୯}, the parameters {μ, K, a, c, ω} are assumed to be piecewise constant. So,
each partition S୧:ଵ୲୭୯ has its own set of constant parameters {μ, K,a, c, ω}୧:ଵ୲୭୯. The
parameters {d, γ, ρ} are the same in all the partitions. To divide the study region into q
partitions, we draw q points without repetition from the set of known locations of earthquakes

--- Sayfa 10 ---
in the catalogue to be used as centres of the Voronoi partitions, while ensuring that within
each of the resulting spatial partitions there are at least 100 earthquakes. This limit of 100
earthquakes is imposed to ensure that estimated parameters of the ETAS model are stable.
Note that drawing the Voronoi centres from locations of earthquakes in the catalogue, rather
than randomly choosing them within the study region, allows for a higher resolution in areas
that are densely populated by seismicity. The modified sampling technique is thus more
natural and data-driven.
2.
We then use the extended EM algorithm proposed by us [Nandan et al., 2017] to invert for the
parameters {μ, K, a, c, ω} is each of the spatial partitions along with the global estimates of the
parameters {d, ρ, γ}.
3.
We then compute the penalised log-likelihood score for the model, BIC = −2LL +
N୮ୟ୰ୱlog N, where N୮ୟ୰ୱ= 7q + 3, as each spatial partition is characterised by one parameter
from the background seismicity rate, two productivity parameters, two Omori parameters and
two Voronoi centre parameters, along with three global parameters corresponding to the
spatial kernel. Note that LL and N respectively correspond to the expected maximum log-
likelihood score obtained upon the calibration of the ETAS model using the EM algorithm
and to the number of earthquakes used for the calibration of the ETAS model.
4.
We then repeat the above mentioned steps 1000 times with different realisations of q Voronoi
centres selected randomly from the list of the earthquakes and store the estimate parameters
and BIC.
5.
We then repeat steps 1 to 4 with a value of q increasing from 1 to 150.
Having calibrated 150,000 models with varying degrees of complexity, we then rank these models
according to their BIC and select the top 1% solution for computing an ensemble model, while giving
the i୲୦ model out of the M selected models the weight ofୣ
୶୮ቂିా
౅ి౟ొቃ
∑ୣ
୶୮ቂିా
౅ి౟ొቃ
౉
౟సభ
.
On calibration of the SVETAS model on the primary earthquake catalogue (shown in Figure 1)
covering the entire period (1981-2017), we find the ensemble estimates of the global parameters: d =
0.20 kmଶ, γ = 1.21, ρ = 0.58. In Figure S1, we show the spatial variation of the five other ETAS

--- Sayfa 11 ---
parameters. We replace the spatially variable estimate of the parameter K by the branching ratio (n),
which is a more informative parameter. It quantifies the average number of direct aftershocks
triggered by any earthquake averaged over all sizes.
Multitudes of factors can contribute to the spatial variation of the parameters. Some plausible ones
include (i) stationary physical processes that genuinely vary in space due to their dependence on local
rock composition, heat flux, water content and fault structures; (ii) spatial variation of the location
uncertainty; (iii) variable anthropogenic forcing, and so on. While it would be essential to distinguish
these effects from each other, this paper only intends to test the meaningfulness of these obtained
estimated spatial variation regarding improved forecasting potential (if any) over the ETAS model
with spatially homogeneous parameters.
Note that the above procedure of calibration of the SVETAS model is repeated for all the training
catalogues to maintain the sanctity of the pseudo-prospective forecasting experiment.
3.2.1.3 Smoothed seismicity forecast using the GETAS and the SVETAS model
Having calibrated the two ETAS models on the training catalogue, a smoothed seismicity forecast for
the corresponding testing period can be constructed by adding the contribution of the following three
components:
A. Spontaneous earthquakes occurring at rate ࣆ
The contribution of exogenous processes is encoded in the parameter μ. However, instead of
directly using it for forecasting the future background seismicity rate, we follow a strategy
akin to that of Helmstetter et al. [2007]. The calibration of the SVETAS model on the training
catalogue using the EM algorithm yields a vital quantity: the independence probability
IP୧corresponding to each earthquake present in the training catalogue. IP୧ quantifies the
probability that the i୲୦ earthquake in the training catalogue has not been triggered by a
previous one. To construct the forecast of the background seismicity for the testing period, we
first obtain a smoothed approximation of the background seismicity rate within the training
period, by smoothing the location of the earthquakes present in the training catalogue. This
can be achieved by using isotropic Gaussian kernels that are weighted according to the

--- Sayfa 12 ---
independence probability of the earthquakes. In a given spatial bin (pre-defined by CSEP)
with index l and spatial extent S୪, the smoothed estimate of the number of background
earthquakes during the training period is given by:
N෡ୠ୩୥= ෍නk୧(x, y) dx dy
ୗౢ
୧
k୧(x, y) =
IP୧
2πσ୧
ଶexp ቈ−1
2 ቊ
(x −x୧)ଶ+ (y −y୧)ଶ
σ୧
ଶ
ቋ቉
(3)
k୧(x, y) is a 2D isotropic Gaussian kernel with bandwidth σ୧, weighted by the independence
probability, IP୧, of the i୲୦ earthquake in the training catalogue. In Equation (3), x୧ and y୧
represent the location of the i୲୦ earthquake in the catalogue; σ୧ is taken as the distance of the
j୲୦ nearest neighbour background earthquake from the i୲୦ earthquake. For all the
investigations conducted in this study, we have fixed j equal to 1.
Note that the analytical value of the integral ∫
k୧(x, y) dx dy
ୗౢ
 for the i୲୦ earthquake in the
rectangular grid cell, with x and y limits respectively being [xଵ, xଶ] and [yଵ, yଶ], is given by
the following expression [Zechar et al., 2010]:
න
k୧(x, y) dx dy
୶మ,୷మ
୶భ,୷భ
= 1
4 ቈerfቊx୧−xଶ
σ୧√2
ቋ−erf ቊx୧−xଵ
σ୧√2
ቋ቉ቈerfቊy୧−yଶ
σ୧√2
ቋ−erf ቊy୧−yଵ
σ୧√2
ቋ቉
where erf(.) is the error function. Having obtained the smoothed number of background
earthquakes in each of the spatial bins during the training period, we construct the forecast of
the number of background earthquakes during the testing period by first normalizing the
spatial density of the background earthquakes such that it integrates to 1 over the predefined
testing polygon and then by scaling the spatial PDF by a factor
୘౪౛౩౪
୘౪౨౗౟౤∑IP୧
୧
. This upscaling
ensures that the forecasted number of the background earthquakes is proportional to the time
duration of the testing period. Note that the index i runs over only those earthquakes in the
training catalogue that are enclosed within the testing polygon, while T୲ୣୱ୲ and T୲୰ୟ୧୬,
respectively, are the duration of the testing and the training periods.
B. Aftershocks of type I

--- Sayfa 13 ---
These aftershocks include not only the direct descendants of the earthquakes in the training
catalog, but also the cascade of earthquakes that would be activated by those direct
aftershocks. While computing the expected number of direct aftershocks in the testing period
due to the earthquakes in the training catalogue is rather trivial and can be done analytically,
one needs to perform simulations to compute the average number of higher generation
aftershocks in the finite sized testing period. This is done using the following simulation
scheme:
1.
Simulate the first-generation aftershocks for all the earthquakes in the training period.
a.
An earthquake with magnitude m୧ can trigger on average
K୧ e[ୟ౟(୫౟ି୑ౙ)]aftershocks with magnitude larger than Mୡ, where Mୡ is the
magnitude of completeness. K୧ and a୧ represent the ensemble estimate of the
productivity parameters at the location of the i୲୦ earthquake.
b.
Times of those aftershocks can be simulated according to the following
equation:
t୨୧= c୧ቊ൫1 −U୨
ଵ൯ି
ଵ
ன౟−1ቋ+ t୧
(4)
In the above equation, t୨୧ is the time of the j୲୦ aftershock that has been
triggered by the i୲୦ earthquake in the training catalogue, which is counted
from the time of the i୲୦ earthquake; U୨
ଵ is a random number drawn uniformly
in the interval [0,1]; c୧and ω୧ are the ensemble estimate of the parameters of
the Omori kernel at the location of i୲୦ earthquake that occurred at time t୧.
c.
Similar to the time of the aftershocks, we simulate the Cartesian coordinates
of the direct aftershocks ൛x୨୧, y୨୧ൟ of the mainshock {m୧,x୧, y୧} using the
following equations:
r୨୧= ቈd exp{γ(m୧−Mୡ)}ቊ൫1 −U୨
ଶ൯ି
ଵ
஡−1ቋ቉
ଵ
ଶ
,
θ୨= 2πU୨
ଷ
x୨୧= r୨୧cos θ୨,
y୨୧= r୨୧sin θ୨
(5)

--- Sayfa 14 ---
In the above equation, r୨୧ and θ୨ are respectively the simulated distance and
the azimuth of the j୲୦aftershock from its mainshock with index i; U୨
ଶ and U୨
ଷ
are random numbers drawn uniformly in the interval [0,1]; d, γ and ρ are the
ensemble estimates of the spatially invariant parameters of the spatial kernel.
d.
We then simulate the magnitude of the direct aftershocks using the following
equation:
m୨=
−log൫1 −U୨
ସ൯
β
+ Mୡ
(6)
In the above equation, U୨
ସ is a number drawn uniformly at random from the
interval [0,1] and β = log (10) is the assumed global exponent of the GR law.
2.
Having simulated the direct aftershocks of all the earthquakes of the training
catalogue, we then reject all those direct aftershocks that do not fall in the testing
period.
3.
All the direct aftershocks selected in step 2 are then treated as new mainshocks that
are then allowed to trigger their own direct aftershocks whose time, location and
magnitude are simulated using the steps a-d defined under step 1. Again, the direct
aftershock selection criteria outlined in step 2 is applied.
4.
Steps 2 and 3 are repeated until no more aftershocks are simulated.
5.
To obtain the smooth coarse-grained map of the number of aftershocks
(direct/indirect) triggered by the earthquakes in the training catalog, we perform
numerous (300,000) simulations; we count the number of aftershocks that occurred in
each of the predefined CSEP bins in each simulation and find the number of
aftershocks in each of the CSEP bins averaged over all simulations.
C. Aftershocks of type II
One also needs to take account of the expected contribution of the direct and higher
generation aftershocks triggered by the background earthquakes expected to occur in the
testing period. The first step in the simulation of these aftershocks is to generate the

--- Sayfa 15 ---
background/seed events from which these aftershocks would emanate. This can be done by
first drawing U୧, a number uniformly drawn at random from the interval ቂ0,
୘౪౨౗౟౤
୘౪౛౩౪ቃ and
comparing it to the independence probability IP୧ of the i୲୦ earthquake in the training catalog.
If U୧≤IP୧, then the location of the i୲୦ earthquake is selected as the location of a new
background event. Note that generating the random number between ቂ0,
୘౪౨౗౟౤
୘౪౛౩౪ቃ ensures that
the expected number of background earthquakes during the testing period is
୘౪౛౩౪
୘౪౨౗౟౤∑IP୧
୧
. This
process is repeated sequentially for all the earthquakes in the training catalogue. For the
selected seed events, we discard their actual time and magnitude information and only retain
their location information. These events are assigned times that are distributed uniformly
randomly between [T୲୰ୟ୧୬, T୲୰ୟ୧୬+ T୲ୣୱ୲] and the magnitudes of these events are simulated as
for the Type I aftershocks. We then simulate the cascade of aftershocks corresponding to all
the simulated seed events as described for Type I aftershocks. Finally, we obtain a smooth
coarse-grained map of the number of aftershocks (direct/indirect) triggered by the background
earthquakes in the testing period by performing numerous (300,000) simulations and finding
the average the number of aftershocks in each of the CSEP bins in all simulations.
3.2.2 Background seismicity-based models
While the earthquakes that occur in nature do not come with the label of “background” or
“aftershocks”, several techniques exist in the literature that are used to assign these tags to the
earthquakes. These methods creatively use the robust empirical laws such as Omori law, Gutenberg
Richter law, productivity law and so on to identify the aftershocks in the earthquake catalogues, which
have been known to adhere to these laws along with the assumption that the “background”
earthquakes follow a Poisson process.
In this study, we have only considered three out of many declustering methods that exist in the
literature. The first one is based on the SVETAS model, while the other two are based on the method
proposed by Reasenberg [1985] and Zaliapin et al. [2008], respectively.

--- Sayfa 16 ---
3.2.2.1 Smoothed seismicity forecast based on the background component of the SVETAS model
(D-SVETAS)
In the case of the SVETAS-based declustering, we obtain the independence probabilities
corresponding to each earthquake, which we have defined earlier to be the probability that the
earthquake has not been triggered. These independence probabilities are not binary values (0 or 1) but
can assume any value between 0 and 1. Smoothing these independence probabilities allows us to
obtain the smoothed number of background earthquakes in each of the spatial bin during the training
period. The smoothing is performed in the same manner as in Section 3.2.1.3. From this, we construct
the forecast of the total seismicity rate during the testing period by first normalising the spatial density
of the background earthquakes such that it integrates to 1 over the predefined testing polygon and then
by upscaling the spatial PDF by a factor
୘౪౛౩౪
୘౪౨౗౟౤N(≥M୲), where N(≥M୲) is the number of earthquakes
with magnitude larger than the predefined magnitude threshold, M୲, of the testing catalogue that have
been observed during the training period within the testing polygon. This upscaling is a necessary
inconsistency as, in the original state, the smoothed seismicity model would only forecast the rate of
background earthquakes during the testing period, which is just a part of seismicity that is going to
occur during that period.
3.2.2.2 Smoothed seismicity forecast based on Reasenberg’s declustering algorithm (D-HKJ)
This method was introduced by Reasenberg [1985] and is based on the previous work of Savage
[1972]. In this algorithm, an earthquake that occurs within the spatiotemporal interaction zone of an
earthquake cluster composed of preceding earthquakes, can be linked to the cluster. The interaction
zone of any given cluster is defined by the time, location and magnitude {t୫ୟ୶
୩
,x୫ୟ୶
୩
, y୫ୟ୶
୩
, M୫ୟ୶
୩
} and
{t୪ୟୱ୲
୩
, x୪ୟୱ୲
୩
, y୪ୟୱ୲
୩
, M୪ୟୱ୲
୩
} of the largest  and last event of the cluster with index k, respectively. Any
earthquake i following the last earthquake of the cluster can be potentially associated to the cluster k
if its distance from the last and largest earthquake of the cluster is smaller than r୤ୟୡ୲10୅×୑ౢ౗౩౪
ౡି
୆ or
10୅×୑ౣ
౗౮
ౡି
୆, respectively. Different authors have suggested different values of the parameters A and
B. In this article, we have fixed the value of A and B to 0.5 and 2, respectively [Helmstetter et al.,

--- Sayfa 17 ---
2007; Wells and Coppersmith, 1994]. r୤ୟୡ୲ is an arbitrary positive multiplicative factor, which is used
to upscale (or downscale) the interaction zone of the last event of any cluster. For the i୲୦ earthquake to
be definitely associated to the k୲୦ cluster, the time elapsed between the i୲୦event and the last event of
the cluster (t୧−t୪ୟୱ୲
୩
) should be smaller than τ, where τ is defined as a “look ahead time” and is equal
to ቄlog ቂ
ଵ
(ଵି୔)ቃ൫t୪ୟୱ୲
୩
−t୫ୟ୶
୩
൯ቅ10ି
మ(౉ౣ
౗౮
ౡ
ష(౉ౙశ౮ౡ×౉ౣ
౗౮
ౡ
)షభ)
య
. The definition of the look ahead time is
derived using the Omori law with exponent 1, a pre-factor 10ି
మ(౉ౣ
౗౮
ౡ
ష(౉ౙశ౮ౡ×౉ౣ
౗౮
ౡ
)షభ)
య
 and a predefined
confidence level P. The pre-factor effectively accounts for the productivity of the cluster depending
on the magnitude of the largest event in the cluster and assumes a completeness level of Mୡ+
x୩× M୫ୟ୶
୩
, which is increased over the base magnitude of completeness Mୡ (=2.95 in our case) by an
amount x୩× M୫ୟ୶
୩
.
Since the value of τ can vary between 0 and ∞, the upper and lower bounds (τ୫ୟ୶ and τ୫୧୬)  must be
specified as well.
If an event is associated with a previously clustered event, it becomes a member of the existing
cluster. Furthermore, when two events belonging to different clusters are associated, the respective
clusters are redefined as a single cluster.
The declustering method has 5 free parameters: r୤ୟୡ୲, x୩, P, τ୫୧୬, and τ୫ୟ୶. In this study, we have
set these parameters to 8, 0.5, 0.95, 1 day and 5 days, respectively. These values have been prescribed
in [Helmstetter et al., 2007]. However, we also explore the sensitivity of the forecasting results to
these parameters in Text S2. The outcome of applying this declustering procedure on the training
catalogues with the fixed set of parameters is the “hard” classification of earthquakes into two groups:
independent earthquakes and dependent earthquakes with independence probabilities 1 and 0
respectively. Having obtained the independence probabilities for the earthquakes in the training
catalogue, the forecast for the testing catalogue is constructed identically as in Section 3.2.2.1.
3.2.2.3 Smoothed seismicity forecast based on Zaliapin declustering algorithm (D-ZB)

--- Sayfa 18 ---
Zaliapin et al. [2008], following the work of Baiesi and Paczuski [2004], proposed a simple
declustering algorithm based on a rescaled space-time distance between earthquakes. This
declustering algorithm is composed of the following steps:
1.
We identify the nearest neighbour earthquake, with index i∗, to the j୲୦ earthquake in the
catalogue. To find the nearest neighbour earthquake, we first compute the space-time
distance, n୧୨, between the j୲୦ earthquake and all the preceding earthquakes. Following Baiesi
and Paczuski [2004], n୧୨ is defined by
n୧୨= t୧୨
஘r୧୨ୢ
౜10ିୠ୫౟
(7)
In the above equation, i (= 1 to j −1) is the index of each of the earthquakes preceding the
j୲୦ earthquake; i∗ corresponds to the index i for which n୧୨ is minimum; t୧୨= t୨−t୧; r୧୨=
ට൫x୨−x୧൯
ଶ+ ൫y୨−y୧൯
ଶ; {t୧,x୧, y୧, m୧} is time, location and magnitude of the i୲୦ earthquake;
θ is the exponent of the Omori law; d୤ is the fractal dimension of earthquake epicentres and b
is the exponent of the GR law. Note that we denote the minimum space-time distance
between events j and i∗ as n୧∗୨.
2.
We repeat step 1 for j = 2 to N, where N is the total number of earthquakes in the catalogue,
to obtain the individual n୧∗୨’s for all earthquakes in the catalogue except the first one. The first
earthquake is by default considered as a background earthquake.
3.
To further classify events j=2 to N as background or aftershock, we then perform a 1D
Gaussian Mixture modelling on the logଵ଴n୧∗୨data. We apply a standard Gaussian mixture
modelling to these N-1 data points, assuming that the data can be described by a mixture of
two Gaussian components (one corresponding to the background earthquakes and the second
one corresponding to the aftershocks), with means and standard deviations {μଵ, μଶ} and
{σଵ, σଶ}, respectively, and mixing coefficients {πଵ,πଶ}. We then use a standard EM algorithm
to estimate {μଵ, μଶ}, {σଵ, σଶ} and {πଵ, πଶ}, and compute the responsibilities γଵ,୨ and γଶ,୨ that

--- Sayfa 19 ---
each component of the Gaussian mixture holds for the j୲୦ earthquake. Note that γଵ,୨+ γଶ,୨=
1. In other words, γଵ,୨ represents the probability for the j୲୦ earthquake to be part of the
Gaussian cluster with index 1, which in our case represents the cluster of background
earthquakes. Note that we use the property that the mean space-time distance of the
background component is larger than that of the clustered component to automatically assign
the label “background” to the group of earthquakes associated with one of the two identified
clusters. As a result, we obtain the independence probability corresponding to the j୲୦
earthquake, IP୨= γଵ,୨.
Note that the Zaliapin declustering algorithm is characterised by three parameters θ, d୤, and b.
Zaliapin et al. [2013] showed that the declustering method is rather robust in identifying background
earthquakes in synthetic ETAS catalogues concerning the specific choice of values for these
parameters. In this study, we have set these parameters to typical values: θ = 1, d୤= 1.6 and b = 1
respectively [Zaliapin et al., 2013]. Nevertheless, we also explore the sensitivity of the forecasting
results to these parameters in Text S2.
Having obtained the independence probabilities for the earthquakes in the training catalogue, the
forecast for the testing catalogue is constructed identically as in Section 3.2.2.1.
3.2.3 Simple Smoothed Seismicity (SSS) model and a model based on Strain rate data (BL)
In the simple smoothed seismicity approach [Zechar and Jordan, 2008], no distinction is made
between a background earthquake and an aftershock. All earthquakes are treated equal and
independent of each other. All earthquakes in the training catalogue are smoothed using isotropic
Gaussian kernels with a nearest-neighbour dependent bandwidth. Doing so, we obtain the smoothed
number of earthquakes in each of the testing cells, which is then scaled as in Section 3.2.2.1 to get the
forecast of the SSS model for the testing period.
We do not construct the Bird and Liu’s (BL) model forecast in this study but merely use the rates of
ܯ≥5.66 earthquakes in [Bird and Liu, 2007] for the study region and scale it appropriately (as in
Section 3.2.2.1) to obtain forecasts for any testing period.

--- Sayfa 20 ---
In Figure 2, we show the forecast for M ≥4.95 earthquakes for the year 2011 based on these six
models as a demonstration. Furthermore, in Text S1, we discuss the differences between the forecasts
obtained from these models.
3.3 Forecast Evaluation
To evaluate the forecasting performance of the different models, we use the metric of sample
information gain per earthquake as defined by Rhoades et al. [2011]. The information gain that model
A provides over model B for the i୲୦ earthquake during the testing period is given by: IG୧= log λ୨୩
୅−
log λ୨୩
୆−
୒෡ఽି୒෡ా
୒
, where λ୨୩
୅ and λ୨୩
୆ respectively are the seismicity rates forecasted by models A and B
in the j୲୦ testing grid cell and k୲୦ magnitude bin in which the i୲୦ earthquake occurred during the
testing period; N෡୅ and N෡୆ are respectively the total number of earthquakes forecasted by models A
and B; N is the number of earthquakes that are actually observed during the testing period. Since all
models in this study assume the same magnitude distribution for the forecasted earthquakes (i.e. a GR
law with b=1), the IG୧ is effectively equivalent to IG୧= log λ୨
୅−log λ୨
୆−
୒෡ఽି୒෡ా
୒
.
Having obtained the pairwise information gain of one model over another, we also evaluate if the
mean and median of the obtained sample information gain is significantly different from 0 using a
pairwise t-test (T-test) and a sign rank test (W-test), respectively [Rhoades et al., 2011].
A model is deemed significantly better if the p-value obtained from these tests is smaller than the
standard significance threshold of 0.01.
4 Results and Discussion
4.1 Overall performance of the models in the 6 experiments
In Figure 3a, the boxplots show the estimates of the mean information gain per earthquake (MIGPE)
and its confidence intervals (25-75% CI using colored boxes, and 2.5-97.5% CI using dashed bars) as
a function of different model types. It is important to note that, in figure 3a we evaluate the
information gain of all the models with respect to a spatially and temporally homogeneous Poisson

--- Sayfa 21 ---
process (STHPP hereafter). The STHPP model forecasts the same number of earthquakes in each of
the testing grid cell, which is equal to
ே(ஹெ೟)
ே೒ೝ೔೏×்
೟೐ೞ೟்
೟ೝೌ೔೙, whereܰ
(≥ܯ௧) is the number of earthquakes
with magnitude larger than the predefined magnitude threshold, ܯ௧, of the testing catalog that have
been observed during the training period within the testing polygon;ܰ
௚௥௜ௗ is the number of
0.1°ܺ0.1° grid cells that divide the testing polygon;ܶ
௧௘௦௧ andܶ
௧௥௔௜௡, respectively, are the duration
of the testing and the training periods. As for the other models, we also assume that the magnitudes of
the earthquakes forecasted by the STHPP model follow the Gutenberg Richter law with a spatially
invariant b-value equal to 1. In the complementary Figure 3b, we choose D-HKJ model instead of
STHPP as the reference and compute the information gain of all the models with respect to it. As a
result, the D-HKJ model is missing from the model list in Figure 3b.
In both the figures, different colors encode the estimates corresponding to the 6 experiments described
above with varying settings in terms of minimum magnitude threshold and time duration of the target
catalog. The line y=0 marks the line of no information gain, which if we were showing probability
gains would be equivalent to y=1.
By pairwise comparison of the MIGPE obtained for all possible pairs of models, we find that
SVETAS model consistently obtains higher information gain compared to all the competing models,
indicating its superiority. This observation is robust with respect to whether we choose STHPP or D-
HKJ model as the reference model.
It is also clear from Figure 3b that GETAS model obtains consistent positive, although marginal
information gain over D-HKJ model making it possibly the second-best model in the set of models
considered in this paper.
D-ZB model obtains nearly no information gain over the D-HKJ model in Experiments 1 and 4. In all
the other experiments D-ZB consistently loses information with respect to D-HKJ model. The
similarity in the forecasting prowess of the two models is not surprising considering the similarity
between the forecasted spatial density of the two models (see for instance Figure 2) which the two
models have despite apparently different declustering ideologies.

--- Sayfa 22 ---
We also notice from Figure 3b that the SSS model consistently underperforms with respect to D-HKJ
model in all the experiments. This observation is indeed consistent with the findings of Werner et al.
[2011] who also found that declustering the training catalog using the Reasenberg algorithm prior to
obtaining a smoothed seismicity forecast (as in case of D-HKJ model) is a better strategy in
forecasting the location of future earthquake than directly obtaining a smoothed seismicity forecast (as
in case of SSS model).
The D-SVETAS model, which is based on the declustered component of the SVETAS model,
consistently underperforms with respect to D-HKJ model. In fact, it tends to underperform even with
respect to SSS model as well at least in terms of MIGPE shown in Figure 3. This raises a question on
the general efficacy of the working hypothesis that location of past background earthquakes reveal the
probable location of future seismicity. It seems that the specificity of declustering algorithms tend to
play an important role in forecasting performance of the resulting SSMs. Indeed, these specificities,
which include the general idea as well as the value of the declustering parameters, control the extent
to which the training catalog is declustered and hence the resulting forecasts for the testing periods. In
case of D-SVETAS and D-ZB models the parameters that control the declustering can be obtained
using a self-consistent framework. However, for the Reasenberg’s declustering algorithm, on which
the D-HKJ model is based, no such self-consistent framework exists and we had to rely on some
“standard” parameter combinations proposed by Helmstetter et al. [2007].
Based on the overall forecasting performance of the models shown in Figure 3, one can argue that
among the three declustering methods used in this study, Reasenberg’s declustering algorithm is the
best in distinguishing between aftershocks and background earthquakes, as it best forecasts location of
all future earthquake. However, such a conclusion is inherently flawed. In none of the experiments
that we have conducted in this study, we try to forecast the location of future background earthquakes.
In fact, such an experiment would be inherently biased if not impossible. This is because nature does
not give us access to the information of whether an earthquake is a background earthquake or not.
Such definitions are only anthropogenic constructions. So, if in a hypothetical forecasting experiment
we define earthquakes during the testing period as background and triggered using certain

--- Sayfa 23 ---
declustering method and evaluate the performance of all models based on the limited set of
background earthquakes, we would inherently favor the model that is the most consistent with the
declustering method used for the definition itself. This would then render the whole forecasting
experiment useless.
Finally, we notice that the BL model, which utilizes the many geologically relevant information such
as strain rate, location and orientation of faults and so on tends to underperform relative to all purely
statistical models. Such gross underperformance possibly indicates that at the time scales of forecasts
considered in this study, those geological information alone cannot lead to forecasts superior than the
purely statistical models. Either these models should be reevaluated on significantly longer
forecasting horizons are they should be combined with their statistical counterparts to yield ensemble
forecasts. In fact, Rhoades et al. [2014] showed that for the same testing region used in this study, a
multiplicative hybrid of D-HKJ model and BL model yielded better forecast than the two models
alone, during the 5 year long testing period [2006, 2010] and for the target magnitude threshold of
4.95.
4.2 Is the performance of models significantly different from each other?
To assess if one model performs significantly better than any other in the six experiments, we carried
out pairwise comparisons of the model information gains using T and W tests [Rhoades et al., 2011,
also see Section 3.3]. The advantage of these pairwise comparisons is that it allows each model to
serve as a reference relative to all the other models, thus leading to a direct comparison between the
two rather than an indirect comparison relative to some common null model.
 In Figure 4 (top panels), we show the p-values obtained from pairwise comparisons of the
information gains of the seven models in all the six experiments using the T-test. A similar plot, but
with the p-values obtained with the W test, is shown in the bottom panels of Figure 4. We treat model
A to be significantly better than model B if the p-value obtained from the test, which is reported in
row A and column B, is smaller than 0.01 (-2 in log10 scale). All the cases in each experiment, where
we were able to find significant evidence in favour of model A over B, have been highlighted using

--- Sayfa 24 ---
red rectangles. Note that, the p-values that were smaller than the computer precision have been
marked as -inf.
Treating each pairwise comparison as a game and a win declared only if one model wins with
acceptable statistical significance, we find that SVETAS, GETAS, D-SVETAS, D-HKJ, D-ZB, SSS
and BL models win 36, 23, 4, 19, 16, 8 and 0 games, respectively, out of 36 games that each model
played. The results from the W-test shown in Figure 4 (bottom panels) are similar with SVETAS,
GETAS, D-SVETAS, D-HKJ, D-ZB, SSS and BL models winning 36, 23, 7, 16, 18, 5 and 0 games,
respectively. Combining the results from the two significance tests, we find the ranking: SVETAS >
GETAS > D-HKJ ≅ D-ZB > SSS ≅ D-SVETAS > BL. Note that, this ranking is also almost
consistent with the boxplot of MIGPE values shown in Figure 3.
We also note that the superiority of SVETAS is overwhelming, in the sense that the largest p-values,
which results from the direct comparison on SVETAS model and the GETAS model in Experiment 4
(testing period being 1 year and ܯ௧= 4.95),  of all the pairwise comparisons in which SVETAS is
involved are always found smaller than 10-4.9. Thus, at any standard confidence level of 95% or 99%,
the null hypothesis is rejected. Even very skeptical readers, who would require a confidence level of
99.998%, should reject the null when presented with our p-value of 10-4.9. In comparison, for instance,
the second-best performing model, GETAS, sometimes wins over other models with just p=0.01,
which will allow one to reject the null hypothesis only when deciding on a 95% or marginally on a
99% confidence level.
We also notice that the strength of evidence in favour of the winning models increases with the
decrease in minimum magnitude threshold of the testing catalogue, which can be explained by the
increasing number of earthquakes in the testing catalogue.
4.3 Time Evolution of the Information Gain
Figure 5 shows the time series of the cumulative information gain (CIG) for the seven models, over
the spatially and temporally homogeneous Poisson process (STHPP). A complementary plot showing
the time series of the average information gain per earthquake (AIGPE) over STHPP for all models is

--- Sayfa 25 ---
shown in Figure 6 where we have obtained the AIGPE values in sliding time windows that contain 20
earthquakes for Experiments 1 and 4, 200 earthquakes for Experiments 2 and 5 and 2000 earthquakes
for Experiments 3 and 6. The time series is obtained by plotting the AIGPE values obtained for each
sliding window against the time of the last earthquake in the window.
From the two sets of time series, we can observe that the SVETAS model consistently outperforms all
the other competing models in all the experiments. Its time series showing its cumulative information
gain and average information gain per earthquake are growing faster and above from those of other
models and stays on top at nearly all times during the entire testing period. This confirms that the
SVETAS model is the best among all the seven models, and its over-performance is not due to some
lucky period but is consistent over the entire testing period.
We also find that even though the GETAS model ends in the second place in all experiments, its
cumulative information gain and average information gain per earthquake time series is not always
clearly separated from those of D-HKJ and D-ZB models. This is especially true for experiments 1, 2,
3 and 4. For experiments 5 and 6, the GETAS model is a definite runner-up. These observations seem
to indicate that the performance of the GETAS model relative to other competing models tends to
improve when time duration and minimum magnitude thresholds of the testing catalogues get smaller,
allowing it to forecast short-term clustered seismicity in the testing data based on the relatively recent
earthquakes in the training catalogue. D-HKJ and D-ZB models perform nearly identically in all
experiments, which is consistent with the fact that the forecasts of the two models are highly
correlated with each other. The cumulative information gain curve of the D-SVETAS and BL models
reveal that they are the weakest in all the experiments. However, these two models, along with the
SVETAS model, get a significant boost in performance in the year 2010, when the ܯ௪ 7.2 El-Major
Cucapah earthquake occurred. All the other models exhibit a deteriorated performance following the
occurrence of this event. All models tend to perform badly in year 2014 (for magnitude cutoffs of 2.95
and 3.95) due to the occurrence of an intense swarm activity in northwest Nevada in November of that
year. All models consistently under-forecasted in the swarm region. As the earthquakes that occurred

--- Sayfa 26 ---
in this swarm sequence were mostly smaller than 4.95, no effect can be seen when using a magnitude
threshold of 4.95.
4.4 Consistency of observed and forecasted number of earthquakes
In Figure 7, we show the consistency between the observed (black crosses) and the number of
forecasted earthquakes (colored squares) by all the models for the six experiments during all the
testing periods. While the SVETAS and GETAS models can forecast the total seismicity rate in any
testing period, all other models (grouped under the class Rest) use the observed number of
earthquakes in the training period (normalised by the duration of testing period) to estimate the
forecast for the testing period. In order to test the consistency of the observed numbers with forecasts
for a given testing period, we then assume (in coherence with the “N-test” proposed by CSEP) that the
observed numbers can deviate from forecasts within limits (95% quantiles) set by a Poisson PDF with
mean rate being equal to the forecasted number. These limits of deviations are shown using the
colored error bars for the three model types. If the deviations exceed these set limits, the forecast can
be said to be inconsistent with the observation.
We find that the models tend to be mostly inconsistent for the magnitude threshold of 2.95, but the
consistency improves with increasing magnitude threshold. For the target magnitude threshold of
4.95, the consistency of the forecasts with the observed number is a rule rather than an exception.
However, this emerging rule should not be confused for a “true” consistency. Instead, it only reflects
that there are not enough events (ܯ≥4.95) in any given testing period to allow one to conclude
about the consistency of the rates forecasted by different models with the observed number of
earthquakes under an arbitrarily imposed Poissonian assumption.
Several factors contribute to the inconsistency of the forecasted and observed number of earthquakes.
First, the test assumes that the distribution of the number of earthquakes within a given testing period
is Poissonian. As a result of this assumption, the range of expected deviation for a given forecast is
exceptionally narrow. Several authors [Werner and Sornette, 2008; Werner et al., 2011; Jackson and
Kagan, 1999; Saichev and Sornette, 2006] have argued that the distribution of the number of

--- Sayfa 27 ---
earthquakes (in the real catalogue) within a time bin of given duration is, in fact, better explained by
distributions with tails thicker than a Poisson distribution. For instance, Werner et al. [2011] showed
that the empirical distribution of the number of earthquakes with ܯ≥4.95 in the ANSS catalog from
1932 to 2008 within the CSEP testing region surrounding California is better described by a negative
binomial distribution compared to a Poissonian distribution. Saichev and Sornette [2006] have shown
that the number of earthquakes within finite space-time windows in California can be represented by
asymptotic power law tails, which is also consistent with the predictions of ETAS model. Werner and
Sornette [2008] studied the impact of magnitude uncertainties on rate estimates in clustering models,
on their forecasts and on their evaluation by CSEP's consistency tests. Given that magnitude
uncertainties are more heavy-tailed than a Gaussian, they found that the Poissonian assumption of the
consistency tests is inadequate for short-term forecast evaluations.
Another possible cause of the inconsistency of the observed and forecasted number of earthquakes is
the non-stationarity of the seismicity rate. Not only there are unknowable short-term fluctuations in
the seismicity rate following the large earthquakes (such as in years 1999 and 2010), there could also
exist non-stationarity at longer timescale. In Figure 8 (upper panel), we show the time series of the
cumulative number of ܯ≥2.95 “background” earthquakes within the CSEP collection polygon
surrounding California. The four lower panels in the figure show the time series of the number of
background earthquakes within a 1-year time window and a sliding duration of 30 days. These
background earthquakes are obtained using the four declustering approaches considered in this study:
D-HKJ, D-ZB, SVETAS and GETAS. As a result of declustering, the major short term fluctuations in
seismicity rate are removed. The remaining events are expected to follow a Poisson process with no
systematic time structure in the seismicity rate. However, we find that, despite the disagreement
between the total expected number of background earthquakes, all the declustering methods
consistently agree in one respect: the rate of background earthquakes in California is non stationary
and seems to systematically decrease during the study period. It is clear that, if one uses the training
catalog (say from the 1981 to 1999), one is bound to overestimate (significantly) the background
seismicity rate for the testing period that follows. This overestimation would not be nullified if one

--- Sayfa 28 ---
takes account of the aftershocks, as the total number of aftershocks is only a multiplicative factor of
the number of background earthquakes that are expected to occur (at least in the hypothetical ETAS
universe). Indeed, this hypothesis is coherent with our observations in Figure 7 (see for instance Row
1, Column 1) that all models tend to systematically over-forecast the number of earthquakes during
the typical testing periods (those which are not influenced by the intermittent burst of seismicity
following a very large event).
5 Conclusion
In all the experiments conducted in this study, the ETAS model with spatially variable parameters
(SVETAS) comes out as the statistically significant winner over other smoothed seismicity-based
models and is followed by the ETAS model with a global set of parameters (GETAS) in most of the
experiments. In none of the experiments, a smoothed model using only the location of past
background earthquakes could outperform the two ETAS based models, which forecast the rate of
aftershocks of all generations. Indeed, our findings highlight the importance of forecasting the rates of
future aftershocks, contrarily to the existing paradigm that the background seismicity alone can lead to
a superior smoothed seismicity forecast. Our results also provide evidence in favor of extending the
applications of ETAS based models (SVETAS in particular) from daily/monthly forecasting horizons
to longer forecasting horizons of 1-5 years, and possibly to even longer forecasting horizons, which
are relevant for seismic hazard models such as UCERF3 [Field et al., 2015].
Among the two ETAS models themselves, accounting for the spatial variation of the parameters leads
to a statistically significant improvement in the forecasting performance of the models and thus
provides more credibility to the spatial variation in parameters reported for the SVETAS model.
Finally, we believe that the “true” performance of a model can only be revealed in a completely
prospective experiment. As a result, we further aim to participate in the forecasting competitions
organized by CSEP to further increase our confidence in the robustness and reliability of our results.
Acknowledgement

--- Sayfa 29 ---
The dataset used in this study can be obtained from the website.
http://www.quake.geo.berkeley.edu/anss/catalog-search.html.
S.N. wishes to thank Y. Kamer for participating in discussions during the development of the work;
M.J Werner, A. Helmstetter, D. Jackson and an anonymous reviewer for critical suggestions and
discussions, which led to significant improvement of the manuscript.
References
1.
Baiesi, M., & Paczuski, M. (2004). Scale-free networks of earthquakes and aftershocks. Physical
review. E, Statistical, nonlinear, and soft matter physics, 69(6 Pt 2), 066106.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.69.066106
2.
Bird, P., & Liu, Z. (2007). Seismic Hazard Inferred from Tectonics: California. Seismological
Research Letters, 78(1), 37–48. doi:10.1785/gssrl.78.1.37
3.
Console, R., Murru, M., Catalli, F., & Falcone, G. (2007). Real time forecasts through an earthquake
clustering model constrained by the rate-and-state constitutive law: Comparison with a purely
stochastic ETAS model.Seismological research letters, 78(1), 49-56.
4.
Daley, D., and D. Vere-Jones (2002), An Introduction to the Theory of Point Process, vol. 1, Springer-
Verlag, New York.
5.
Ebel, J. E., D. W. Chambers, A. L. Kafka, and J. A. Baglivo (2007). Non-Poissonian earthquake
clustering and the hidden Markov model as bases   for   earthquake forecasting   in   California,
Seismol.   Res.   Lett. 78, 57–65
6.
Eberhard, D. A., Zechar, J. D., & Wiemer, S. (2012). A prospective earthquake forecast experiment in
the western Pacific. Geophysical Journal International, 190(3), 1579-1592.
7.
Field, E. H. (2007). Overview of the working group for the development of regional earthquake
likelihood models (RELM). Seismological Research Letters, 78(1), 7-16.
8.
Field, E. H., Biasi, G. P., Bird, P., Dawson, T. E., Felzer, K. R., Jackson, D. D., Johnson, K.M., Jordan,
T.H., Madden, C. Michael, A.J., Milner, K.R., Page, M.T., Parsons, T., Powers, P.M., Shaw, B.E.,
Thatcher, W.R., Weldon, R.J. II, and Zeng, Y. (2015). Long‐term time‐dependent probabilities for the
third Uniform California Earthquake Rupture Forecast (UCERF3). Bulletin of the Seismological
Society of America, 105(2A), 511-543.
9.
Helmstetter, A., & Sornette, D. (2002a). Subcritical and supercritical regimes in epidemic models of
earthquake 
aftershocks. Journal 
of 
Geophysical 
Research: 
Solid 
Earth, 107(B10) 
2237,
doi:10.1029/2001JB001580.
10. Helmstetter, A., & Sornette, D. (2002b). Diffusion of epicenters of earthquake aftershocks, Omori’s
law, and generalized continuous-time random walk models. Physical Review E, 66(6), 061104.
11. Helmstetter, A. (2003). Is earthquake triggering driven by small earthquakes? Physical Review
Letters, 91(5), 058501.
12. Helmstetter, A., & Sornette, D. (2003a). Foreshocks explained by cascades of triggered
seismicity. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 108(B10) 2457 10.1029/2003JB002409 01.

--- Sayfa 30 ---
13. Helmstetter, A., & Sornette, D. (2003b). Båth's law derived from the Gutenberg‐Richter law and from
aftershock properties. Geophysical research letters, 30(2069) 10.1029/2003GL018186.
14. Helmstetter, A., Sornette, D., & Grasso, J. R. (2003). Mainshocks are aftershocks of conditional
foreshocks: How do foreshock statistical properties emerge from aftershock laws. Journal of
Geophysical Research: Solid Earth,108(B1) 2046, doi:10.1029/2002JB001991.
15. Helmstetter, A., Kagan, Y., & Jackson, D. (2007). High-resolution Time-independent Grid-based
Forecast for M ≥ 5 Earthquakes in California. Seismological Research Letters, 78(1), 78–86.
doi:10.1785/gssrl.78.1.78
16. Helmstetter, A., & Werner, M. (2014). Adaptive smoothing of seismicity in time, space, and magnitude
for time‐dependent earthquake forecasts for California. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of
America, 104.
17. Hiemer, S., & Kamer, Y. (2016). Improved Seismicity Forecast with Spatially Varying Magnitude
Distribution. Seismological Research Letters, 87(2A), 327–336. doi:10.1785/0220150182
18. Iwata, T. (2010, May). Effect of secondary aftershocks on aftershock decay in the rate-and state-
friction model. In EGU General Assembly Conference Abstracts (Vol. 12, p. 7920).
19. Jackson, D. D., & Kagan, Y. Y. (1999). Testable earthquake forecasts for 1999. Seismological
Research Letters, 70(4), 393-403.
20. Jordan, T. H., & Jones, L. M. (2010). Operational earthquake forecasting: Some thoughts on why and
how. Seismological Research Letters, 81(4), 571-574.
21. Kagan, Y. Y., & Jackson, D. D. (2011). Global earthquake forecasts. Geophysical Journal
International, 184(2), 759-776.
22. Nandan, S., Ouillon, G., Wiemer, S., & Sornette, D. (2017). Objective Estimation of Spatially Variable
Parameters of Epidemic Type Aftershock Sequence Model: Application to California. Journal of
Geophysical Research: Solid Earth. doi:10.1002/2016jb013266
23. Ogata, Y. (2011). Significant improvements of the space-time ETAS model for forecasting of accurate
baseline seismicity. Earth, planets and space, 63(3), 217-229.
24. Reasenberg, P. (1985). Second‐order moment of central California seismicity, 1969–1982. Journal of
Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 90(B7), 5479–5495. doi:10.1029/jb090ib07p05479
25. Rhoades, D., Schorlemmer, D., Gerstenberger, M., Christophersen, A., Zechar, & Imoto, M. (2011).
Efficient testing of earthquake forecasting models. Acta Geophysica, 59(4). doi:10.2478/s11600-011-
0013-5
26. Rhoades, Gerstenberger, Christophersen, Zechar, Schorlemmer, Werner, & Jordan. (2014). Regional
Earthquake Likelihood Models II: Information Gains of Multiplicative HybridsRegional Earthquake
Likelihood Models II: Information Gains of Multiplicative Hybrids. Bulletin of the Seismological
Society of America, 104(6), 3072–3083. doi:10.1785/0120140035
27. Rhoades, Christophersen, & Gerstenberger. (2017). Multiplicative earthquake likelihood models
incorporating strain rates. Geophysical Journal International, ggw486. doi:10.1093/gji/ggw486
28. Saichev, A., & Sornette, D. (2006). Power law distribution of seismic rates: theory and data
analysis. The European Physical Journal B-Condensed Matter and Complex Systems, 49(3), 377-401.
29. Savage W. (1972). Microearthquake clustering near Fairview Peak, Nevada, and in the Nevada seismic
zone. Journal of Geophysical Research. doi:10.1029/JB077i035p07049

--- Sayfa 31 ---
30. Schorlemmer, & Gerstenberger. (2007). RELM Testing Center. Seismological Research Letters, 78(1),
30–36. doi:10.1785/gssrl.78.1.30
31. Schorlemmer, D., Zechar, D., Werner, M., Field, E., Jackson, D., & Jordan, T. (2010a). First Results of
the Regional Earthquake Likelihood Models Experiment. Pure and Applied Geophysics, 167(8-9),
859–876. doi:10.1007/s00024-010-0081-5
32. Schorlemmer, D., Christophersen, A., Rovida, A., Mele, F., Stucchi, M., & Marzocchi, W. (2010b).
Setting up an earthquake forecast experiment in Italy. Annals of Geophysics.
33. Seif, S., Mignan, A., Zechar, J. D., Werner, M. J., & Wiemer, S. (2017). Estimating ETAS: The effects
of truncation, missing data, and model assumptions. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid
Earth, 122(1), 449-469.
34. Steacy, Gerstenberger, Williams, Rhoades, & Christophersen. (2013). A new hybrid
Coulomb/statistical model for forecasting aftershock rates. Geophysical Journal International.
doi:10.1093/gji/ggt404
35. Strader, A., Schneider, M., & Schorlemmer, D. (2017). Prospective and retrospective evaluation of
five-year earthquake forecast models for California. Geophysical Journal International, 211(1), 239-
251.
36. Veen, A., & Schoenberg, F. (2008). Estimation of Space–Time Branching Process Models in
Seismology Using an EM–Type Algorithm. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 103(482),
614–624. doi:10.1198/016214508000000148
37. Wang, Q., Jackson, D., & Zhuang, J. (2010). Missing links in earthquake clustering
models. Geophysical Research Letters, 37(21), n/a–n/a. doi:10.1029/2010GL044858
38. Wells, D., & Coppersmith, K. (1994). New empirical relationships among magnitude, rupture length,
rupture width, rupture area, and surface displacement. Bulletin of the seismological Society of
America, 84(4), 974–1002.
39. Werner, M. J., and D. Sornette (2008). Magnitude uncertainties impact seismic rate estimates,
forecasts, and predictability experiments, J. Geophys. Res. (Solid Earth) 113, B08302,
doi:10.1029/2007JB005427.
40. Werner, M. J., Zechar, J. D., Marzocchi, W., & Wiemer, S. (2010). Retrospective evaluation of the
five-year and ten-year CSEP-Italy earthquake forecasts. ANNALS OF GEOPHYSICS, 53, 3.
41. Werner, M., Helmstetter, A., Jackson, D., & Kagan, Y. (2011). High-Resolution Long-Term and Short-
Term Earthquake Forecasts for CaliforniaHigh-Resolution Long-Term and Short-Term Earthquake
Forecasts for California. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 101(4), 1630–1648.
doi:10.1785/0120090340
42. Wiemer, S., & Schorlemmer, D. (2007). ALM: An Asperity-based Likelihood Model for
California.Seismological Research Letters, 78(1), 134–140. doi:10.1785/gssrl.78.1.134
43. Zaliapin, I., Gabrielov, A., Keilis-Borok, V., & Wong, H. (2008). Clustering Analysis of Seismicity
and Aftershock Identification. Physical Review Letters, 101(1), 018501.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.101.018501
44. Zaliapin, I., & Ben‐Zion, Y. (2013). Earthquake clusters in southern California I: Identification and
stability. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 118(6), 2847–2864. doi:10.1002/jgrb.50179
45. Zechar, J. D., & Jordan, T. H. (2008). Testing alarm-based earthquake predictions. Geophysical
Journal International, 172(2), 715-724.
46. Zechar, D., & Jordan, T. (2010). Simple smoothed seismicity earthquake forecasts for Italy. Annals of
Geophysics, 53(3), 99–105.

--- Sayfa 32 ---
47. Zechar, J. D., Schorlemmer, D., Liukis, M., Yu, J., Euchner, F., Maechling, P. J., & Jordan, T. H.
(2010). The Collaboratory for the Study of Earthquake Predictability perspective on computational
earthquake science. Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience, 22(12), 1836-1847.
48. Zechar, D., Schorlemmer, D., Werner, M., Gerstenberger, M., Rhoades, D., & Jordan, T. (2013).
Regional Earthquake Likelihood Models I: First‐Order Results. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of
America, 103(2A), 787–798. doi:10.1785/0120120186
49. Zhuang, J., Ogata, Y., & Vere-Jones, D. (2002). Stochastic declustering of space-time earthquake
occurrences. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 97(458), 369-380.
Table 1: Definition of important acronyms used in the manuscript
Acronyms
Description
ETAS
Epidemic Type Aftershock Sequence Model; see equation 1 and 2
GETAS
ETAS model with spatially homogenous parameters; see section 3.2.1.1
SVETAS
ETAS model with spatially variable parameters; see section 3.2.1.2
SSM
A smoothed seismicity model
RELM
Regional earthquake likelihood model; see Schorlemmer and Gerstenberger
[2007]
CSEP
Collaboratory for the Study of Earthquake Predictability; see Werner et al.
[2010]
D-HKJ
A smoothed seismicity model obtained by smoothing the location of
background earthquakes obtained from Reasenberg’s declustering algorithm;
see section 3.2.2.2
D-ZB
A smoothed seismicity model obtained by smoothing the location of
background earthquakes obtained from Zalliapin and Ben-Zion’s declustering
algorithm; see section 3.2.2.3
D-SVETAS
A smoothed seismicity model obtained by smoothing the location of
background earthquakes obtained from SVETAS model; see section 3.2.2.3
SSS
A simple smoothed seismicity model based on undeclustered data; see section
3.2.3
BL
A model proposed by Bird and Liu, [2007], which is based on strain rate data;
see section 3.2.3
IG
Information Gain; see section 3.3
MIGPE
Mean information gain per earthquake; see section 4.1 and figure 3
STHPP
Spatially and temporally homogenous Poisson process, which has been
defined in section 4.1
CIG
Cumulative information gain; see section 4.3
AIGPE
Average information gain per earthquake; see section 4.3

--- Sayfa 33 ---
Figures
Figure 1: Earthquakes used in this study: grey dots show the locations of auxiliary earthquakes
(ܯ≥2.95; 1971 −1981); grey crosses show the locations of all primary earthquakes (ܯ≥2.95;
1981 −2016); blue dots, red circles and black stars  show the locations of ܯ≥2.95, ܯ≥3.95 and
ܯ≥4.95 earthquakes that occurred during the entire testing period (1999-2016); only earthquakes
within the testing polygon are involved in testing.

--- Sayfa 34 ---
Figure 2: Forecast of ܯ≥4.95 earthquakes for the year 2011 based on six models: GETAS,
SVETAS, D-SVETAS, D-HKJ, D-ZB, SSS and BL, investigated in this study; (A) contribution of
background earthquakes (Row 1, Column 1 and R1,C3 ), type I aftershocks (R1, C2 and R1,C4) and
type II aftershocks (R2, C1 and R2,C1) to the final forecast (R2, C2 and R2, C4)  of GETAS and
SVETAS models, respectively; (B) declustering based smoothed seismicity models: D-SVETAS, D-
HKJ and D-ZB; (C) undeclustered smoothed seismicity model or SSS model; (D) BL or strain rate
based model.

--- Sayfa 35 ---
Figure 3: Boxplots showing the estimates of the mean information gain per earthquake (MIGPE)
and its confidence interval as a function of model type, magnitude threshold of the target catalog, and
duration of the testing period; information gain of all competing models has been evaluated with
respect to the STHPP and D-HKJ model in panel a and b respectively on each box, the central dashed
mark indicates the median, circle indicates the mean, the bottom and top edges of the box indicate the
25 and 75 percent confidence interval, respectively, and the dashed bars indicate the 95% confidence
interval; the small dots at the top and bottom of boxes indicate the outlying estimates of the median
information gain per earthquake.

--- Sayfa 36 ---
Figure 4: pairwise comparison of information gains of models using T-test and W-test for the 6
experiments; time duration and magnitude threshold of the testing catalogue in each of the six
experiments are indicated at the left and top of the figure; the colormap shows the݈݋݃ଵ଴݌௩௔௟௨௘ (also
given as numbers in each cell) found from the pairwise comparison of the information gain obtained
by the models for all the earthquakes involved in the pseudo prospective testing; values smaller than -
2 indicate that there is significant evidence in favor of one model over another: all such values have
been highlighted; -inf values occur when the p-values are indistinguishable from 0 at computer
precision.

--- Sayfa 37 ---
Figure 5: Time series of Cumulative information gain (CIG) of the seven models over STHPP in
the six experiments conducted in this study; solid black lines mark the time of occurrence of ܯ≥6
earthquakes during the testing period.

--- Sayfa 38 ---
Figure 6: Time series of average information gain per earthquake (AIG) of the 7 models over
STHPP in the 6 experiments (column 1 corresponds to experiments 1 to 3, and column 2 corresponds
to experiments 4 to 6) conducted in this study; solid black lines mark the time of occurrence of ܯ≥6
earthquakes during the testing period.

--- Sayfa 39 ---
Figure 7: Number of earthquakes forecasted by SVETAS, GETAS and rest of the models in each of
the testing period are shown as coloured markers for each of the six experiments; Error bars show the
possible 95% deviation from the forecasted numbers under the Poissonian assumption; Black crosses
show the observed number of earthquakes.

--- Sayfa 40 ---
Figure 8: (Upper Panel) Time series of cumulative number of background earthquakes obtained
using different declustering methods considered in this study;(Bottom Panels) Time series of number
of background earthquakes in a period of 1 year calculated every 1 month for the four declustering
methods is shown in blue; Red lines show the average number of background earthquakes during all
1-year periods.

--- Sayfa 41 ---
Supporting Information for
Forecasting the rates of future aftershocks of all generations is
essential to develop better earthquake forecast models
Shyam Nandan1, Guy Ouillon2, Didier Sornette3, Stefan Wiemer1
1ETH Zürich, Swiss Seismological Service, Sonneggstrasse 5, 8092 Zürich, Switzerland
2Lithophyse, 4 rue de l’Ancien Sénat, 06300 Nice, France
3ETH Zürich, Department of Management, Technology and Economics, Scheuchzerstrasse 7, 8092
Zürich, Switzerland
Corresponding author: Shyam Nandan (shyam4iiser@gmail.com)
Contents of this file
Text S1 to S2
Figures S1 to S2
Text S1: How different are the seven smoothed seismicity forecasts from each other?
In Figure 2, we show the smoothed seismicity forecast of M ≥4.95 earthquakes for the year
2011 based on the seven smoothed considered seismicity models: GETAS, SVETAS, D-
SVETAS, D-HKJ, D-ZB, SSS and BL. Note that the forecasts for other magnitude thresholds
3.95 and 2.95 can be obtained from these maps by simply multiplying the presented
forecasts by a factor 10 and 100.
In Figure 2 (A), we show the three essential forecast components: background earthquakes,
aftershocks of type I and type II, for the GETAS and SVETAS model. In both models, the
background component only explains a meagre ~13% and 24%, respectively, of the total
expected seismicity rate. On the other hand, type I and type II aftershocks explain ~50% and
37% for the GETAS model, and ~50% and 26% for the SVETAS model.
It is interesting to note that, while both GETAS and SVETAS models are based on the same
“ETAS” principles, obvious differences between them can be identified among the
forecasted seismicity patterns for the different components of the two models. For instance,
the SVETAS model forecasts much higher background rate and much lower aftershock rates
(of both types) in the Geysers geothermal field and offshore Mendocino (barring the triple
junction) compared to the GETAS model. This feature is not only present during the chosen
testing period but during all the testing periods considered in this study. The aftershock rate
forecasted by the SVETAS in the two regions is so exceptionally low that it can be concluded
that most of the seismicity in these two regions are the result of exogenous processes. A

--- Sayfa 42 ---
similar conclusion cannot be reached from the GETAS model. The origin of this difference
can be traced to the spatially varying parameters of the SVETAS model. The SVETAS model
supports the conclusion that most of the seismicity in the Geysers geothermal field is indeed
driven by anthropogenic fluid injection, which is an exogenous process. Furthermore, the
higher background seismicity rate in the offshore Mendocino detected by the SVETAS
model can be due to either or a combination of the following factors: (i) larger location
uncertainty for the offshore events; (ii) larger catalog incompleteness leading to missing
parents and orphan earthquakes, which appear as background events; (iii) enhanced
external forcing due to some unknown physical mechanism.
In Figure 2 (B), we show the forecasts based on the D-SVETAS, D-HKJ and D-ZB models.
We find that the forecasts of the D-HKJ model and D-ZB model are very similar to each other
with a correlation coefficient of ~0.95 (i.e. statistically significant) despite apparently different
declustering ideologies. On the other hand, the forecast of the D-SVETAS model exhibits a
smaller correlation to both models, albeit with a larger correlation with the D-ZB model than
with the D-HKJ model (correlation coefficients of ~0.73 and 0.62, respectively).
The extent of declustering achieved by the three models differ. For instance, the 1992
M୵ 7.3 Landers and 1999, M୵ 7.1 Hector Mine earthquake’s aftershock zones are easily
observable in the forecasts of the D-HKJ and D-ZB models, while they are almost absent in
the forecast of the D-SVETAS model, thus making it the most stringent among the three
declustering algorithm. However, it is important to remember that the intensity of
declustering itself is not a metric with which one can assess the quality of a declustering
algorithm. In fact, the relative performance of the forecasts of the declustering methods can
only provide limited evidence in favor of one declustering method over another, as the
forecasts are constructed on all the earthquakes in the testing period. These earthquakes not
only include the background earthquakes, but also a considerable number of aftershocks,
which those declustering methods are designed not to forecast.
Despite the differences in the three declustering methods, all of them consistently forecast
high background seismicity (and thus high total seismicity rate) in the region around the
Geysers geothermal field and offshore Mendocino. Furthermore, compared to the SVETAS
and GETAS models, none of these three models forecast an elevated seismicity rate in the
region around the El-Major earthquake.
In Figure 2(C), we show the forecast of M ≥4.95 earthquakes based on a simple smoothed
seismicity (SSS) model and a model based on strain rate (BL) in the left and right panels,
respectively. While the SSS model bears a high degree of resemblance to the D-HKJ and D-
ZB models (correlation coefficients of 0.9 and 0.78, respectively), its resemblance to the D-
SVETAS model is rather weak with a correlation coefficient of only 0.4. The systematic
decrease of correlation with the SSS model when going from the D-HKJ model to the D-
SVETAS model is in line with our previous assertion that the D-SVETAS model is the most
stringent of the three declustering algorithms considered in this study.
Finally, the BL model bears the least resemblance to all the smoothed seismicity models
considered in this study.
Text S2: Are Reasenberg’s and Zaliapin declustering algorithms with optimal
parameters better than the SVETAS model?

--- Sayfa 43 ---
In our tests of the D-HKJ model, we have assumed a fixed set of parameters for the
Reasenberg’s declustering algorithm based on the work of Helmstetter et al. [2007].
However, other studies such as Schorlemmer and Gerstenberger [2007] have suggested
that the parameters r୤ୟୡ୲, x୩, P, τ୫୧୬, and τ୫ୟ୶ can vary within the range [5-20], [0-1],
[0.9,0.99], [0.5, 2.5] and [3,15]. It is thus necessary to investigate the sensitivity of the
forecasting potential of the D-HKJ model to the choice of the declustering parameters. For
this, we perform 10 regular sampling of each of these parameters and obtain 10ହ parameter
combinations. For each of the combinations, we repeat the experiments 4, 5 and 6. Figure
S2 (upper panel) shows the distribution of MIGPE obtained over the 10ହ parameter
combinations for the experiments 4, 5 and 6. For a given parameter combination and
experiment type, MIGPE is obtained from the sample information gain of each earthquake in
all 1 year-long testing periods between 1999 and 2016. In this figure, we also indicate, using
triangular markers, the value of MIGPE corresponding to the declustering parameters used
in earlier sections and by Helmstetter et al. [2007]. We find that the values of the declustering
parameters used earlier in this study are indeed not optimal and yield MIGPE values of 1.21,
1.33 and 1.34 compared to the MIGPE values of 1.31, 1.40 and 1.44 obtained for the optimal
parameter combinations {8.33, 0.67, 0.98, 2.05, 13.67}, {10, 0.11, 0.91, 1.83, 15} and {8.33,
0.22, 0.96, 2.05, 8.33} for the experiments 4, 5 and 6, respectively.
To investigate if the smoothed seismicity model with optimal parameters, D-HKJ*, is
significantly more informative than the D-HKJ model, we perform a right tailed W-test. The
log10 of p-values for this test are shown in the insets of Figure S2. Indeed, the p-values are
much smaller than the standard significance threshold of 0.01 and, hence the D-HKJ* model
can be more informative. It is important to note, however, that the D-HKJ* model has 5 free
parameters, which should be accounted for when comparing the two models. We do this by
means of Wilks’ loglikelihood ratio test. Given that the cumulative information gain of the D-
HKJ* model over the D-HKJ model is 5.61, 32.93 and 317.39 in the experiments 4, 5 and 6
respectively, the Wilks’ statistics is found to be 0.046, 7.38× 10ିଵଷ and 6.11 × 10ିଵଷହ,
respectively. Considering the standard significance threshold of 0.01, the evidence in favor
of the D-HKJ* model over the D-HKJ model is quite conspicuous. Finally, even after allowing
for parameter optimization of the D-HKJ* model on the testing catalogs, in none of the
experiments does the D-HKJ* model surpass the performance of the SVETAS model. On the
contrary, the SVETAS model significantly outperforms the D-HKJ* model in each of these
three experiments with the p-values of the W-test being much below the standard
significance threshold of 0.01 (see insets in Figure S2).
We perform a similar analysis as above for the Zaliapin declustering algorithm, which is
characterized by the three set of parameters θ, d୤, and b. We allow these parameters to vary
within the range (0, 2], (0, 2] and (0, 2]. Within this specified range, we perform 50 regular
sampling of each of these parameters and obtain 1.25 × 10ହ parameter combinations. Figure
S2 (lower panel) shows the distribution of MIGPE for experiments 4, 5 and 6 for these
125,000 parameter combinations. We find that while the value of MIGPE for the optimal D-
ZB* model is significantly larger than that of the D-ZB model in all the experiments, the D-ZB*
model still significantly underperforms with respect to the un-optimized SVETAS model.
These sensitivity analyses echo our earlier findings that the SVETAS model is a vastly
superior smoothed seismicity model compared to D-ZB and D-HKJ, and not even
optimization can change this conclusion.

--- Sayfa 44 ---
Figure S1: Spatial variation of the Background seismicity rate (ߤ), Productivity
parameters:݊
 and ߙ(=
௔
௟௢௚(ଵ଴)) and Omori parameters:ܿ and ݌(= 1 +߱
).

--- Sayfa 45 ---
Figure S2: Distribution of the median information gain obtained for different values of
declustering parameters of the Reasenberg’s (top panel) and Zaliapin’s (bottom
panel) declustering algorithms, for the experiments 4, 5 and 6. Median is obtained
from the sample information gain of each earthquake in all the 1 year long testing
periods between 1999 and 2016; triangular markers indicate the median information
gain obtained for the values of standard declustering parameters; log10 of p-values of
the W-test comparing the sample information gain of the optimal models (D-HKJ* and
D-ZB*) to the D-HKJ model and D-ZB model respectively are shown in the first
column of inset tables; p-values of the W-test comparing the sample information gain
of the SVETAS model to optimal models (D-HKJ* and D-ZB*) are shown in second
column of the inset tables.
