
--- Sayfa 1 ---
Generalization with Reverse-Calibration of Well and 
Seismic Data Using Machine Learning Methods for 
Complex Reservoirs Predicting During Early-Stage 
Geological Exploration Oil Field 
 
 
Dmitry Ivlev 
dm.ivlev@gmail.com 
 
 
 
 
The aim of this study is to develop and apply an autonomous approach for predicting the 
probability of hydrocarbon reservoirs spreading in the studied area.  
Materials and methods. The prediction was made based on the 3D seismic survey data and well 
information on the early exploration stage of the studied field. The results of the lithological interpretation 
of logging from nine wells were used, four of which penetrated the object vertically or subvertically, while 
the remaining five were drilled horizontally through different stratigraphic parts of the Achimov 
sedimentary complex, which is the object of this study. The paper presents an approach based on a 
technological stack of machine learning algorithms with the task of binary classification and modification 
of the geological-geophysical dataset. The study includes the following sequence of actions: creation of 
data sets for training, selection of features, reverse-calibration of data, creation of a population of 
classification models, evaluation of classification quality, evaluation of the contribution of features in the 
prediction, ensembling the population of models by stacking method. 
As a result, a prediction was made - a three-dimensional cube of calibrated probabilities of 
belonging of the studied space to the class of reservoir and its derivative in the form of the map of reservoir 
thicknesses of the Achimov complex of deposits was obtained. Assessment of changes in the quality of the 
forecast depending on the use of different data sets was carried out. 
Conclusion. The reverse-calibration method proposed in this work uses the uncertainty of 
geophysical data as a hyperparameter of the global tuning of the technological stack, within the given limits 
of the a priori error of these data. It is shown that the method improves the quality of the forecast. The 
technological stack of machine learning algorithms used in this work allows expert-independent 
generalization of geological and geophysical data, and use this generalization to test hypotheses and create 
geological models based on a probabilistic view of the reservoir. The approach, formalizes the 
generalization of data about the target, using only factual information such as lithology along the wellbore 
and seismic data. Depending on the input data, the approach can be a useful tool for finding and exploring 
geologic targets, identifying potential resources, and optimizing and designing reservoir development 
systems. 
Keywords: machine learning, well data, seismic attributes, facies prediction, rock properties 
prediction, augmentation methods, ensemble learning, feature selection, feature contribution evaluation, 
geophysics. 
 

--- Sayfa 2 ---
Introduction 
This paper develops a methodology for predicting the spatial distribution of 
rocks that are reservoirs for hydrocarbons. The methodology uses machine learning 
algorithms in the problem of binary classification, which restore the probability 
function of the space element belonging to the classes identified by the results of 
interpretation of well logging. Attributes of seismic wavefield are used as predictors. 
The peculiarities of the study include the following factors:  
• 
the object of the study is the Achimov complex of deposits, the 
formation of which is associated with the flow to the foot of the Neocomian 
shelf terraces of sand and silt sediments in the form of turbidite flows of 
varying density and landslides;  
• 
the forecast is made on the basis of 3D seismic survey data at the 
early stage of exploration works, when most of the study area is not covered 
by drilling results, and the well information about the study object is mainly 
concentrated in one area;  
• 
the number of wells that penetrated the object of study is nine, of 
which four wells penetrated the object vertically or subvertically, and five - 
with horizontal penetration in different stratigraphic parts of the studied 
complex of deposits. 
Given the features described above, the purpose of this research is to develop 
and demonstrate an expert-independent-autonomous technology stack that consists 
of machine learning algorithms and methods for modifying training data to predict 
the probability of reservoir propagation. Autonomy means that after preparation and 
input of geological and geophysical information, as well as determination of 
uncertainty parameters and a priori calibration limits, the expert's influence on 
algorithms operation is minimal. The optimal case is when the algorithm itself on 
the basis of constraints and input data determines model parameters, selects 
attributes, type and degree of modification of borehole and seismic data. 
The study includes the following sequence of actions: creation of a basic data 
set, selection of features, creation of a modified data set by reverse-calibration, 
creation of a population of classification models, evaluation of forecast quality, 
evaluation of the contribution of features to the forecast, combining models into an 
ensemble, final forecast, analysis of the obtained results. 
Materials and methods 
The area of work was covered by 3D seismic survey. After processing and 
complex interpretation of seismic data, a depth cube of amplitudes was obtained, 
from which the study area was identified. The width of the area is 12,000 meters, 
the length is 24,000 meters and the thickness is 400 meters. The resolution of the 

--- Sayfa 3 ---
allocated seismic survey is 25 meters laterally and 5 meters vertically. The total 
dimensionality is i 480, j 960, k 80. 
Using the seismic survey data, 456 seismic wavefield attributes were 
obtained by applying 25 different attribute extraction algorithms with different 
window sizes: 10, 20, 30 and 50. In addition, mono-frequency cubes were created 
using a spectral decomposition algorithm in the frequency channel range from 1 to 
45 Hz with decomposition of frequencies by Ricker and Morlet wavelets. The space 
attributes were standardized, and a Yeo-Johnson stepwise transformation was also 
performed.  
The results of lithologic interpretation of geophysical well surveys were 
classified into two classes, reservoir and non-collector. The reservoir was coded as 
1 and the non-collector was coded as 0. The results of downhole data classification 
were approximated onto a grid using the dominant frequency of the class in each 
grid element (voxel) of the seismic cube intersecting the well trajectory. This created 
vectors from the spatial data, where each class definition along the well path was 
assigned 456 space features. 
In order to create a training sample, the selection of traits was carried out in 
two stages. At the first stage, the features that were strongly correlated with other 
features, where the Pearson coefficient exceeded 0.95, were removed. At the second 
stage, the BoostARoota algorithm [1] based on the CatBoost classifier [2] was used 
to evaluate the significance of the features. As a result of the selection, 54 most 
significant attributes were selected from the initial data set containing 456 attributes, 
on the basis of these attributes was carried out further study of the data. 
To modify the well data, the study applied the reverse-calibration method, 
which was used in [3] to determine the optimal position of the seismic wavefield 
relative to well trajectories by finding the best machine learning model feedback to 
recover a continuous sequence of lithology classes along the wellbore, using the 
surrounding space attribute values. In this study, this method was modified to 
account for the nature of the studied object. 
Thus, as a result of exploratory data analysis, it was found that when 
lithology was approximated on a grid with a seismic measurement scale (25x25x5 
m) for horizontal wells, the prediction was unstable and the classification quality 
score was low. The size of the seismic cube grid element to which the lithology class 
was approximated could not sufficiently correctly convey the variability of the 
environment for prediction purposes. Following the principle of autonomy of the 
prediction process, additional functions were incorporated into the reverse-
calibration method to optimize the process. In addition to finding the best position 
of the well profile in the wavefield, functions were added to find the optimal level 
of grid sampling. 

--- Sayfa 4 ---
To implement the reverse-calibration method, the well trajectories were 
copied together with the classification well logs with lateral spacing of 0, 10 and 20 
meters in different directions of light, as well as with vertical up/down spacing of 0, 
5 and 10 meters. Thus, 125 trajectories were obtained for one well, including the 
initial position. For each trajectory, the lithological classification log was projected 
onto grids with different lateral spacing: 25 m (x1), 12.5 m (x2) and 6.25 m (x4). 
Thus, 750 variations were obtained for each well. 
Finding the optimal seismic wavefield offset position relative to the original 
trajectory was accomplished by enumerating the variants created in the previous step 
and optimizing the classification error function of the machine learning algorithm 
on cross-validation for each unique combination of well trajectories. 
Variant optimization of a group of wells for which a selection is made from 
a unique combination of variants of spatial position and type of approximation: 
𝑋𝑑,𝑙= 𝑉 (𝑋𝐷,𝐿), 
𝑑∈𝐷, 𝑙∈𝐿, 
where 𝑋𝐷,𝐿 is an array of all positions and lithology approximation options for 
wells D, with spatial data vectors L, function 𝑉 (⋅) randomly or through a search grid 
generates 𝑋𝑑,𝑙 – an array of a unique combination of position and approximation 
options for wells d with a feature vector array for this combination. 
𝑋𝑑,𝑙
𝑚𝑖𝑛= 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑋𝑑,𝑙 [𝐸 (С (𝑉 (𝑋𝐷,𝐿)
𝑛) )], 
𝑛∈𝑁, 
where each combination n from the number of well position combinations N 
is given to the classification function С (⋅), the result of the classification is evaluated 
by the error function 𝐸 (⋅). 𝑋𝑑,𝑙
𝑚𝑖𝑛   an array of a set of wells and their vectors with 
the minimum value of classification error. 
Given the significant number of combinations possible as a result of discrete 
displacement of trajectories, and various approximation options, the enumeration of 
all possible combinations can take a long time. In this regard, the search optimizer - 
Parcene Tree Estimator (TPESampler) [4, 5] was applied. This method reduces the 
search time for optimal combinations by using previous results and a priori 
knowledge of the error function. TPESampler is based on building a Gaussian 
process model that predicts the error function for different combinations of 
parameters, and then selects the most promising options for the next search 
iterations. The Random Forest algorithm was used to evaluate the classification 
quality, which achieves a good balance of accuracy and speed when dealing with a 
large number of features. Classification quality was evaluated using the ROC AUC 
metric on cross-validation by wells, in which one well was extracted from the 

--- Sayfa 5 ---
training set and the classifier was trained on the remaining wells. The quality metric 
of the trained classifier was then evaluated on the withdrawn well, after which the 
data from the withdrawn well were returned to the overall sample, the next well was 
selected from it, and the evaluation process was repeated. The results of the ROC 
AUC quality score were averaged across the wells for the overall evaluation of the 
offset well combinations. The ROC AUC estimate for the base case was 0.604, for 
the best found case 0.721. Seismic wavefield offset distances and well data 
approximation coefficients for the best response of the training model are shown in 
Table 1. 
Table 1. Seismic field shifts relative to well trajectories and  
degree of lithology approximation to grid 
Well 
X 
Y 
Z 
Scl_down 
16G 
-20 
-10 
10 
x4 
13G 
-20 
10 
10 
x2 
14G 
-20 
0 
10 
x4 
12G 
20 
20 
5 
x2 
17G 
-10 
10 
0 
x4 
170 
10 
0 
5 
x1 
165 
10 
10 
-5 
x1 
171 
10 
10 
0 
x1 
11 
0 
10 
0 
x1 
 
Two datasets were created: the Base dataset (Base) and the reverse-calibrated 
dataset (RC). The Base dataset contains wells in their original positions, 
approximated by the seismic survey scale. The RC set contains modified data on the 
wells after the reverse-calibration algorithm works. The number of class labels is 
given in Table 2. 
Table 2. Quantity of datasets for training 
Class 
Base 
RC 
0 
486 
861 
1 
217 
464 
Sum 
703 
1325 
 
To prevent data leakage - the accidental exchange of any information 
between test and training sets - a data handling protocol [3] was used, which has the 
following design. The data were first standardized, and then a Yeo-Johnson stepwise 
transformation was performed. The transformation parameters were transferred from 
the seismic field attribute cubes to the well data sets. Eight partitioning options were 
created for the training, validation, and test samples for the baseline and RC datasets. 
For each dataset, a variant of the same well combinations was generated. The test 

--- Sayfa 6 ---
and validation portions included data from one vertical well or one horizontal well. 
Thus, the test well was isolated and used to assess classification quality, and the 
validation well was used to fine-tune the models and control training. Combinations 
of 8 partitioning options ensured that the test well data did not fall into the training 
sample in each individual option, but the entire data set in the various training 
combinations was available for the 8 models of the same machine learning algorithm 
in total, and they were tuned for the full range of geologic conditions penetrated by 
the wells. 
The training design consisted of two phases. The first phase trained the 
baseline models and the second phase trained the metamodel on the results of the 
baseline models. 
Training data are class labels with seismic field attributes, which is a typical 
example of structured tabular data. To classify such data in practice, gradient binning 
algorithms over decision trees (GBDT) in various implementations such as CatBoost 
[2], LightGBM [6] and XGboost [7] are used. Recently, however, deep learning 
algorithms that also perform well on tabular data have emerged. One of such 
algorithms, TabPFN (Prior-data Fitted Network) [8], was used in this study, which 
is well suited for ensemble with the results of GBDT algorithms, since its errors do 
not correlate with the errors of these methods (Rashka 2022). 
For all machine learning algorithms, hyperparameters were optimized by 
maximizing the ROC AUC metric on crossvalidation with class ratio balancing. For 
GBTD models, the selection of hyperparameters was performed using the 
TPESampler optimizer [4, 5]. For TabPFN, by sequentially enumerating from 2 to 
200 the parameter N_ensemble_configurations, for which the maximum ROC AUC 
value was achieved at a value of 21. 
Using the GBDT model population, we assessed the importance of the 
features for the prediction (Table 3). The evaluation was performed by calculating 
the Shepley index for each batten separately [9]. The obtained results were scaled 
(min-max) within a batch, and then summed up for each attribute. Table 3 shows the 
20 traits with the maximum total contribution. The dominance of the importance for 
prediction of the attributes obtained by the spectral decomposition algorithm with 
decomposition frequencies from 1 to 13 Hz by the Morlet wavelet is noted. It is 
likely that this algorithm can be used to partially rationalize the prediction results 
obtained from the 54 dimensional attribute space. At the same time, the 
predominance of low frequencies of amplitude decomposition by spectral 
decomposition in 20 significant attributes may indicate peculiarities of seismic data 
processing. 
 
 

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Table 3: Twenty most important features for GBDT algorithms 
Features 
Score 
SD-morlet-2 
19.00926 
gradient_magnitude 
11.02174 
SD-morlet-4 
10.57292 
SD-morlet-10 
10.22294 
SD-morlet-13 
9.849514 
sweetness 
9.758056 
SD-morlet-12 
9.590384 
instantaneous_amplitude 
9.458229 
quadrature_amplitude 
9.351962 
amplitude_spectrum 
9.272130 
SD-ricker-2 
9.107664 
SD-ricker-3 
8.951618 
SD-ricker-4 
8.749442 
SD-morlet-7 
8.669727 
SD-morlet-5 
8.238869 
dominant_frequency 
8.028878 
SD-ricker-5 
8.000961 
SD-morlet-1 
7.896709 
coherence 
7.442584 
SD-morlet-11 
7.330567 
 
For the final prediction, the model population was ensemble-trained using 
the stacking method. This ensemble learning method uses a metamodel that is 
trained and makes a prediction based on the prediction results of the underlying 
models. A logistic regression algorithm was used as the metamodel. Before 
ensemble training, the models were pre-trained on the full dataset with a fixed 
number of iterations with a limit of tree growth in depth. 
The small amount of training data did not allow us to create a separate test 
sample for the metamodel without losing the quality of the final prediction, so we 
used the method of weighting votes to evaluate the metamodel. To do this, the weight 
was first calculated: 
𝑤𝑖= 𝑒𝑘𝑖, 
where 𝑘𝑖is the coefficient in the logistic regression equation for the 
predictions of each individual base model. Then the weighted average value was 
calculated: 
𝑥̅ = 
∑
𝑤𝑖𝑥̅𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
∑
𝑤𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
, 

--- Sayfa 8 ---
where 𝑥̅𝑖 is the classification quality metric of each individual base model, 
determined on the test set; n is the population of models. 
The method of weighting of votes allows to estimate approximately the 
metamodel structure and to average the forecast quality through weighting of metrics 
of individual models in the ensemble.  
According to the value of logistic regression coefficient the most significant 
models for prediction were determined: the models trained on the basic data set 
(Table 4) and after reverse-calibration (Table 5). The table for each model shows the 
degree of its contribution to the metamodel prediction (impotant scr), shows the 
algorithm by which the model was trained (algo), and the wells on which it was 
validated (val) and tested (test), gives the quality metrics of F1 score measure 
classification for each class (Class 0, Class 1). The final values (weighted impotant) 
are obtained as the weighted average of the model significance factor (impotant scr) 
for each quality metric. 
Table 4: The most important models on the basic dataset for the  
metamodel and their characteristics 
Impotant scr 
algo 
test 
val 
Class 0 
Class 1 
30.585 
cat 
16G 
171 
0.583 
0.563 
19.084 
lgb 
12G 
165 
0.583 
0.578 
15.752 
lgb 
171 
12G 
0.605 
0.522 
13.237 
xgb 
12G 
165 
0.633 
0.569 
1.966 
cat 
171 
13G 
0.584 
0.509 
weighted impotant 
0.596 
0.558 
 
Table 5: The most important models on the reverse-calibrated dataset  
for the metamodel and their characteristics 
Impotant scr 
algo 
test 
val 
Class 0 
Class 1 
37.392 
lgb 
12G 
171 
0.775 
0.642 
36.928 
cat 
12G 
171 
0.797 
0.666 
18.042 
cat 
165 
12G 
0.772 
0.677 
12.090 
lgb 
165 
12G 
0.720 
0.622 
11.602 
xgb 
14G 
165 
0.753 
0.560 
1.460 
cat 
14G 
165 
0.707 
0.511 
weighted impotant 
0.772 
0.643 
 
The results of the evaluation show an increase in the quality of class 
prediction after reverse-calibration of initial data from 0.558 to 0.643 (Table 4, Table 
5). Average weighted metric F1 score of reservoir prediction quality at the level of 
0.643 is acceptable for the given stage and nature of the field study (dominance of 
data from horizontal wells). This F1 score metric value does not correlate with the 
absolute value of metamodel prediction quality and is used for relative comparison 

--- Sayfa 9 ---
of algorithm performance on data sets. In practice, the quality of the metamodel 
predictions exceeds the quality of the predictions of the individual models and their 
weighted averages. 
As a result of model ensemble and calibration of metamodel probabilities on 
isotonic regression - predictions are made. A three-dimensional cube of the 
calibrated probabilities of the space under study belonging to the "manifold" class is 
obtained. 
To analyze the three-dimensional probability cube, we calculated the map of 
net pay thicknesses over the entire Achimov complex of sediments (Fig. 1). The 
effective thicknesses were calculated as follows: 
ℎ𝑖𝑗= ∑
1(𝑃𝑖𝑗𝑘≥𝑃𝑇) 𝑠
𝐾
𝑘=1
, 
where 𝑠 is the vertical resolution of the approximation grid, 𝑃𝑖𝑗𝑘 is the 
predicted probability that the voxel belongs to the collector class, 𝑃𝑇 is the threshold 
probability that the voxel belongs to the collector class, and 1(∙) is the indicator 
function. 
The vertical resolution of the approximation grid 𝑠 of 5 meters per voxel was 
used to build the map, and the probability threshold 𝑃𝑇 was set to 0.5. 
Figure 2: Map of predicted reservoir thicknesses of the Achimov sedimentary complex, derived 
from a reversed-calibrated dataset. Orange curves - well trajectories 
 
 

--- Sayfa 10 ---
Conclusions 
The map of predicted reservoir thicknesses traces the general patterns of the 
structure architecture of the Achimov sedimentation complex: landslide bodies 
characteristic of this sedimentation complex, turbidite flows of different density and 
areas of sediment discharge are contrastingly highlighted. This prediction depends 
on the results of lithological interpretation of the logging data; thus, if the reservoir 
cutoff changes according to petrophysical properties, the probabilistic representation 
of the geological object will change. 
The reverse-calibration method proposed in this paper uses uncertainties in 
the geological and geophysical data as a hyperparameter for global tuning of the 
technological stack from machine learning algorithms, through modification of the 
training dataset. The boundaries of the reverse-calibration response search are set 
based on an a priori assumption about the limits of our knowledge of the natural 
object and the possible instrumental errors in obtaining this knowledge. In this work, 
we used the search for position displacement of the seismic wavefield relative to the 
well trajectories and the scale of data approximation to the grid. It is shown that for 
this variant, the method increases the values of weighted metric F1 of the metamodel 
measure from 0.558 to 0.643. At the same time, the reverse-calibration method can 
vary other parameters of training sample acquisition by reverse-engineering the data. 
For example, the cutoff by petrophysical properties of reservoir extraction can be 
used as another hyperparameter of algorithm stack tuning, through modification of 
the training sample. 
It should be noted that the low absolute values of quality metrics of 
individual classification models obtained as a result of the study may indicate the 
complexity of the object for generalization of borehole and seismic data at the 
current stage of the field study. Thus, for such a complex object of study as the 
Achimov complex of deposits, the obtained three-dimensional probabilistic 
representation of the reservoir can be used as an auxiliary tool, i.e., a tool of primary 
formalization of the accumulated knowledge about the object of study on the basis 
of the available information. The field studied in the work is at the early stage of 
study, so its further development will require drilling of exploration wells in the 
zones of geological interest. Selection of these zones can be carried out with the help 
of the proposed approach. After drilling the wells and obtaining new data, the model 
can be updated and used for more accurate assessment of the geological object, 
which in turn improves decision making on further exploration and provides a 
continuous cycle of independent assessments based on actual data with positive 
feedback from any results of drilling each new well. 
The approach proposed in the work based on the technological stack of 
machine learning algorithms allows to formalize the primary generalization of data 
about the object of study, considering the existing uncertainties, using the actual 

--- Sayfa 11 ---
material in the form of well survey results and geospatial data. The approach may 
be one of the tools for generalization of available geological and geophysical 
information at the existing level of territory study. With the help of this tool it is 
possible to create three-dimensional probabilistic representation of the geological 
object, to improve this representation after receiving new data, to create a continuous 
cycle of formalized evaluations. The results of the forecast can be used as an expert-
independent initial hypothesis for the subsequent work of experts, algorithms and 
decision-making. 
 
 

--- Sayfa 12 ---
List of references 
1 
BoostARoota GitHub repository. 
https://github.com/chasedehan/BoostARoota. 
2 
Prokhorenkova G., Gusev A., Vorobev A., Dorogush, Gulin A. CatBoost: 
unbiased boosting with categorical features. In Bengio S., Wallach H., 
Larochelle H., Grauman K., Cesa-Bianchi N., Garnett R. editors. 
Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS’18). Curran Associates, 2018. 
3 
Ivlev D. Reservoir Prediction by Machine Learning Methods on The 
Well Data and Seismic Attributes for Complex Coastal Conditions arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2301.03216v1 2023. 
4 
Bergstra James S., et al. Algorithms for hyper-parameter optimization. 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2011. 
5 
Bergstra James, Daniel Yamins, David Cox. Making a science of model 
search: Hyperparameter optimization in hundreds of dimensions for 
vision architectures. Proceedings of The 30th International Conference on 
Machine Learning, 2013. 
6 
Ke Q. Meng, T. Finley, T. Wang, W. Chen, W. Ma, Q. Ye, T.-Y. Liu. 
Lightgbm: A highly efficient gradient boosting decision tree. In I. Guyon, 
U. von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and 
R. Garnett editors. Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS’17). 
Curran Associates, 2017. 
7 
Chen and C. Guestrin. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In B. 
Krishnapuram, M. Shah, A. Smola, C. Aggarwal, D. Shen, and R. 
Rastogi editors. Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International 
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD’16), ACM 
Press, 2016, pp. 785–794. 
8 
Hollmann N., Müller S., Eggensperger K., Hutter F. TabPFN: A 
Transformer That Solves Small Tabular Classification Problems in a 
Second. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2207.01848v4, 2022. 
9 
Scott Lundberg, Su-In Lee. A Unified Approach to Interpreting Model 
Predictions arXiv arXiv:1705.07874v2, 2017. 
 
