
--- Sayfa 1 ---
Prediction of geophysical properties of rocks on rare 
well data and attributes of seismic waves by machine 
learning methods on the example of the Achimov 
formation 
 
Dmitry Ivlev, Zarubezhneft JSC 
dm.ivlev@gmail.com 
 
Abstract 
Purpose of this research is to forecast the development of sand bodies in 
productive sediments based on well log data and seismic attributes. The object of 
the study is the productive intervals of Achimov sedimentary complex in the part of 
oil field located in Western Siberia. The research shows a technological stack of 
machine learning algorithms, methods for enriching the source data with synthetic 
ones and algorithms for creating new features. The result was the model of 
regression relationship between the values of natural radioactivity of rocks and 
seismic wave field attributes with an acceptable prediction quality. Acceptable 
quality of the forecast is confirmed both by model cross validation, and by the data 
obtained following the results of new well. 
 
Key 
words: 
seismic 
interpretation, 
Achimov 
formation, 
reservoir 
characterization, well logs, seismic attributes, features generation, geoinformatics, 
feature selection, synthetic data, CGAN, feature engineering, regression models, 
CatBoost, LightGBM, XGBoost, attribute contribution, stacked generalization. 
 
Introduction 
Anisotropy of properties of the reservoirs and seals for productive pools is one 
of the main uncertainties affecting the evaluation and further development of oil and 
gas production projects. This is especially true for the projects with hydrocarbon 
reservoirs in Achimov sediments at an early stage of exploration maturity, when 
there is on average little information and it consists of the test results from several 
wells and 3D seismic data. At this stage, seismic data is the main and almost the only 
source of knowledge about the area. 
To predict the geological rock section based on seismic data, there have been 
developed various approaches to seismic-stratigraphic interpretation, which includes 
the following methods and approaches: amplitude analysis, geostatistical analysis, 
cluster analysis, seismic facies zonation, time thickness analysis, analysis of constant 
time slices, etc. Complexity and multifactorial nature of interpretation of the 
geological section by seismic data is noted in the papers [1, 2, 3, 4, etc.]. The 
complexity is associated with spatial resolution of the source seismic data, 
variability of the geological section and difficulty of transferring functions from one 
seismic survey to another even within the same field. Besides, a judgmental factor 
plays an important role in the interpretation of seismic data. All these factors create 

--- Sayfa 2 ---
a combination of aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties in seismic-stratigraphic 
interpretation of a complex rock section, especially at an early stage of field 
maturity. 
The work objective is to implement a comprehensive approach to reducing 
these uncertainties with subsequent prediction of spatial variability of geophysical 
properties of rocks by finding a relationship between various seismic attributes, their 
derivatives and geophysical parameters of the geological section defined in the 
drilled wells. Thereafter to reconstruct regression model between the sparse spatially 
localized high-resolution data and the encompassing hyperspace of the environment 
parameters with low spatial resolution using machine learning algorithms. 
The object of the research is the productive intervals of Achimov sedimentary 
complex in the part of oil field located in Western Siberia. Papers of many authors 
are devoted to the conceptual model of the structure of Achimov sedimentary 
complex [5, 6, 7, etc.]. Deposition of Achimov sediments is associated with the 
ingress of silt and sandy sediments in the form of turbidite flows of different density 
and landslides to the footing of Neocomian shelf terraces. These phenomena are 
genetically and spatially connected with the areas of sediments discharge transported 
by fluvial distributary systems. Achimov thickness is considered in unity with its 
shelf zones as a single genetically connected complex and represents a fondoform 
part of the cycle. The cycle was developed in a relatively deep-water part of the 
basin, which is confirmed by many factors. Deposition of siltstone and sandstone 
layers was controlled by the activity of avalanche sedimentation zones - turbidite 
flows, landslides, and channels of transportation of sedimentary material that was 
coming from the continental part (canyons on the surface of the shelf terrace slope) 
[8, 9].  
3D seismic data were acquired within the research area with subsequent 
processing and interpretation of acquired materials. Five wells were drilled in this 
area at different times: two exploration wells, two development horizontal wells and 
one development deviated well. 
The following work sequence was implemented in the research: creation of the 
data set, creation of a regression model population, evaluation of attribute 
contribution to the forecast, combining the models into a metamodel, final 
reconstruction of the regression relationship and assessment of prediction quality. 
 
Creation of the basic data set for learning 
The main stage in creating a basic data set for learning (Fig.1) is the features 
generation [10]. Features generation is the process of using the domain knowledge 
to extract the features from the source data.  
At the first stage, 25 algorithms of attribute extraction from seismic data were 
used for features generation; window sizes 5, 10, 20, 30, 50 were used for 
calculations. At the second stage, the gradient between the values obtained for each 
window and the frequency of spectral decomposition was calculated. Features with 
the best correlation with the determination factor 0.81 have been excluded from the 
resulting attribute data set for the studied area; a set of 341 attributes was obtained. 
At the third stage, four transform algorithms were applied to this data set. The first 

--- Sayfa 3 ---
and the second derivatives were calculated, cubes clustering was carried out using 
k-mean algorithm, geomorphological attributes were calculated by upscaled cube 
slices (Fig. 1).  
The project space was segmented by a 3D grid with 480х480x60 size, 5-meter 
vertical step and 25-meter horizontal step. The size was chosen as the minimum 
possible for accumulation of seismic data, as a smaller scale would not reflect the 
environment variability, assigning one value to a number of cells, and a larger size 
would lead to loss of information. Attribute values were normalized for the entire 
cube and brought to the grid size by the following methods: arithmetic mean, root 
mean square (RMS), maximum, minimum. After normalizing the values to the grid 
size, the features were filtered by the determination factor 0.81. A data set consisting 
of 4,084 attributes in each cell of the research area was acquired. 
Fig. 1. Scheme for creating a basic training dataset 

--- Sayfa 4 ---
Selection of the petrophysical rock property as the target function of regression 
reconstruction is driven by the coverage with well logging methods in the drilled 
wells in the study interval and informative value of the method in terms of 
lithological interpretation of the geological section. Only one method fully satisfied 
the specified conditions - the method of measuring natural radioactivity of rocks 
(Gamma-Ray Logging) [11]. 
GR log was normalized to maximum and minimum measurements in the 
interval of Achimov complex and to its arithmetic mean value brought to the 3D 
grid. After normalizing, the target parameter was represented by a sample of 366 
values averaged over a grid of normalized GR values. 
 
Generation of the synthetic data set – geophysical data augmentations 
Exploration analysis by various algorithms of machine learning showed 
unsatisfactory prediction quality and impossibility to make a robust generalization 
on the chosen wells with acceptable quality (Table 1). There are two possible options 
to enhance the sample by the target feature: drill additional wells and/or generate a 
synthetic data set (augmentations). The approach of generating a synthetic data set 
using two methods was used in this research paper (Fig. 2).  
 
Fig. 2. Synthetic dataset creation scheme  
 
The first method is the "spindle" method. The method got its name due to its 
implementation features: a well trajectory gets slightly deformed, and grid 
refinement to one meter is carried out locally near the well, average GR values and 
attribute values are calculated based on the log curve from the slightly changed new 
position, thus "winding on" the information surrounding the wellbore. The premise 
for this approach was the assumption on the uncertainty of the wellbore location in 
the wave field and the fact that various attribute parameters of the wave field reflect 
the pickups from different scale from lithology parameters detected by the GR curve. 
Thus, a data set of 1,697 GR values with 4,084 features was generated.  

--- Sayfa 5 ---
The second method is based on generation of the synthetic sample using the 
generative adversarial network based on the CGAN architecture (Conditional 
Generative Adversarial Nets).  
Generative adversarial network (GAN) is the machine learning algorithm 
without a teacher, built on the combination of two neural networks, one of which 
(generative network) generates samples, and the second (discriminating network) 
tries to distinguish the right ("true") samples from the wrong ones. Generative and 
discriminating neural networks have the opposite goals - to create samples and to 
reject samples, an antagonistic game appears between them [12, 13]. 
Conditional Generative Adversarial Nets is a modified version of GAN 
algorithm, the architecture of which can be designed with help of transfer of 
additional data that is a condition both for the generator and for discriminator. 
Additional data can be transferred to the architecture in the form of any additional 
information, for example, a class mark, image or data from other models, which can 
allow to control the process of data generation [14]. 
 
 
Fig. 3. Normalized attribute values reduced to a 2D set for CGAN learning. 
 
Additional data in CGAN learning were the values of the target function - GR 
log. Initial vector of 4,084 combinations of normalized attributes reduced to the 2D 
set 64х64 was used as the learning data; the missing elements were duplicated (Fig. 
3). Any number of synthetic data can potentially be generated using this method, as 
the quality of the resulting set of attributes for each GR value will be determined by 
its representation in the learning data set. After algorithm refining for this specific 
task and architecture learning, a data set was generated for 5,000 values of the target 
function in accordance with its initial distribution. 
Three learning samples were formed following the results of synthetic data 
generation: 
 basic - it includes just the initial data set with 366 GR values with 4,084 
features; 
 semi-synthetic - basic plus a set of data acquired using the spindle 
method 2063х4084; 
 synthetic - semi-synthetic plus data generated by CGAN algorithm 
7063x4084; 

--- Sayfa 6 ---
Total sampling is 7,063, which is equivalent to 118 vertical wells brought to 
the grid with vertical resolution 60 cells. 
 
Creation of regression models population and evaluation of attribute 
contribution to prediction 
Gradient boosting algorithm over decision trees in its specific implementations 
CatBoost [15], LightGBM [16] and XGBoost [17] was used to restore the regression 
relationship. Presently, this class of algorithms is a proven standard for learning 
classification and regression models on a heterogeneous set of numerical and 
categorical data. Use of third-party libraries SHAP [18] and LIME allows to interpret 
the resulting models. 
Huber function was used as the loss function, which is a combination of mean 
squared error function (RMS) and mean absolute error function (MAE). 
 
 
Fig. 4. Scheme of generating regression models population and evaluation of 
attribute contribution 
Each sample was divided into three parts: training, test, and validation in the 
proportion of 60х20х20, monitoring that at least 40% of values from the basic or 
semi-synthetic samples are present in the testing or validating data set (Fig. 4). 

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Configuring hyper-parameters of machine learning algorithms was carried out on 
semi-synthetic sample and was used for all experiments.  
 
Table 1. Hubert error function values 
Sample / Model  Catboost  LightGBM  XGBoost  Average 
Basic 
0.1375 
0.1281 
0.1687 
0.1448 
Semi-synthetic 
0.0588 
0.0616 
0.0583 
0.0596 
Synthetic 
0.0159 
0.0157 
0.0151 
0.0156 
 
Table 1 shows the average result of obtained values of Huber error function on 
the test sample after 100 iterations of learning each algorithm by the samples with 
their various random separation. 
Quality of the algorithm prediction on the test samples is on average the same 
for each of the three data sets. 
Enriching the initial sample with synthetic data at each stage significantly 
reduced the error and its variance. Adding the data acquired by the spindle method 
to the basic sample reduced the error 2.43 times on average, and increase of the 
sample due to the data generated by CGAN additionally reduced the error 3.82 times. 
The achieved prediction quality is good, given the initial level of error on the basic 
sample.  
Attribute contribution to prediction was evaluated for each of 900 models. 
Features relevance was evaluated by calculation of the Shapley index vector for 
them. Values of the Shapley index for each feature were summed and sorted in 
descending order of their impact on prediction. 
 
Fig. 5. Shapley value for the six most important attributes 
 
The first six attributes most significant for prediction are shown here (Fig. 5). 
The others were inexpressive relative to each other in terms of impact degree; thus, 
the total Shapley index of the seventh feature was already 29% less than the sixth 
one, and the change in contribution of the subsequent features to the 542nd made an 

--- Sayfa 8 ---
almost uniform contribution to the prediction as a steadily decreasing function with 
0.3% slope; the impact of the remaining features was insignificant in the aggregate 
but was sometimes material for single models. 
 
Fig. 6. Comparison of space clustering methods: a) horizontal slice according 
to the values of the spectral decomposition cube; b) clustering by the k-mean 
algorithm; c) clustering with the terrain clusters algorithm 
 
Feature with ranking 1 was calculated by the terrain clusters algorithm [19] 
with 5 clusters extracted from the slices of spectral decomposition cube of the 
original seismic cube using Ricker wavelet with 30 Hz frequency, 1 second pulse 
length and a scale factor 4 reduced to the average value grid. 
The idea of using this algorithm was born in process of searching for methods 
to formalize the "geological view" on the seismic attribute slices, when the 
geological bodies are picked by attribute slices, their gradient of changes in values 
and their shape (Fig. 6a). The k-mean clustering algorithm is not capable of such 
separation, as it works directly with attribute values [20]. At the same time, if we 
consider this slice as a proxy terrain - reflecting the geomorphology of the paleo-
object, it is possible to divide this space using the methods of geoinformatics, as part 
of which there was developed a wide range of techniques for segmentation of 
landforms, one of which is Terrain Clusters. Fig. 6 shows the difference in splitting 
the space into 5 classes using two clustering algorithms, the original horizontal slice 
of spectral decomposition is shown on the left (Fig. 6a), the same slice after 
clustering by k-mean algorithm (Fig. 6b) is in the center, and the result of terrain 
clusters algorithm is on the right (Fig. 6c). 
Feature 2 is the first derivative of sweetness seismic attribute in its arithmetic 
mean approximation on the grid.  
a 
b 
c 

--- Sayfa 9 ---
 
Fig. 7. The gradient between the frequencies of the spectral decomposition: a) 
frequency 20 Hz; b) frequency 5 Hz; c) the gradient between these frequencies 
 
Feature 3 is the gradient between the frequencies from 20 to 5 Hz of the spectral 
decomposition by the Ricker wavelet with 1 second pulse length and a scale factor 
4 with reduction to the grid by RMS value. Using a gradient allows to minimize the 
values of reiterated shapes and enhance the changes between the windows and 
attribute picking frequencies (Fig. 7). 
Feature 4 is calculated by k-mean method with allocation of 21 clusters by 
amplitude spectrum attribute with grid reduction by maximum value. 
Feature 5 is the tie to one of five stratigraphic horizons. 
Feature 6 is the instantaneous frequency attribute, reduced to the grid by the 
average value. 
 
Fig. 8. Distribution of 542 Significant Attributes by Conversion Categories 
 
The graph (Fig. 8) shows the percentage of the first 542 significant features 
distributed between the categories according to the transformation method. The first 
category is formed by the original attributes extracted from the seismic data and the 
a 
b 
c 

--- Sayfa 10 ---
expert estimates, which is 10% of 542. The second and the third categories are the 
first and second derivatives - 15% and 4% respectively. The fourth category includes 
the features created by the k-mean 24% clustering algorithm. The fifth includes 
features created by the methods of geoinformatics 30%. The sixth is represented by 
the method of calculating the gradient between attribute values extracted by different 
windows and frequencies of spectral decomposition. 
 
Ensembling the best models into the metamodel, the final forecast with 
quality assessment 
For the final forecast (Fig. 9), models with minimum values of the Hubert error 
function were combined into a metamodel with a stack generalization by the 
RidgeCV linear regression algorithm [21]. Stack generalization uses the prediction 
of each individual "weak" model and combining the strong predictive properties of 
each model makes a potentially better-quality prediction. 
Fig. 9. Scheme of final prediction 
 
Learning of the metamodel was carried out sequentially on three samples, first 
on the base case sample, then the model was trained on the semi-synthetic sample, 
and finally - on the synthetic sample. The final error of reconstructing regression 
model of the target function was 0.045. Relatively insignificant increment in the 
quality of metamodel prediction over individual models is probably due to the 
resolution limit of the original seismic data and their derivatives. 

--- Sayfa 11 ---
The metamodel performed prediction of normalized GR values over the entire 
volume of the survey space. Model prediction quality was checked using both actual 
drilling results of vintage wells and a new well data. 
 
Fig. 10. The ratio of the predicted values of the normalized gamma-ray logging 
and the actual: a) wells from the training dataset; b) new well with horizontal 
completion 
 
For the wells from learning sample (Fig. 10a), the correlation coefficient R2 
between predicted model values and actual values of normalized GR logs was 
R2 = 0.71 with a standard deviation of 0.061. For a newly drilled well with a 1,000 
m horizontal segment (Fig. 10b), 150 meters parallel from one of the wells from the 
learning sample, the data of which the model "did not see", the correlation coefficient 
dropped to R2 = 0.66 with a standard deviation of 0.08. Despite the decrease in R2, 
correlation between the absolute values of the forecast and actual data on the new 
well remained quite high; this indicates an acceptable predictive value of the model, 
at least in the area of 150 meters from wellbore locations from the training sample. 
It should be noted that it is likely that the correlation of absolute values between the 
fact and the forecast will decrease when moving away from these wells, this is due 
to different conditions of seismic acquisition and peculiarities of its processing, 
however, for the fields at an early stage of exploration maturity, in some cases, it is 
enough to keep the trend of changes in the forecast values, to assess the potential 
economic efficiency of field development and to adjust location of exploration wells 
and the wells for pilot production. 
 
a 
b 

--- Sayfa 12 ---
Fig. 11. Forecast of normalized rock properties: a), b), c) sections of porosity 
cube along the wellbore with GR log curve; e) map of total net pays for Achimov 
sedimentary complex; f) fragment of the map of total net pays according to the well 
data (data from wells that penetrated Achimov sequence – transit wells). 
 
Regression relationship between GR values and effective porosity was restored 
by machine learning algorithms based on well data. Effective porosity cube was 
calculated. 
Map of total normalized net pays (Fig. 11e) and sections of the projected cube 
of normalized porosity (Fig. 11a, 11b, 11c) demonstrate a complicated detailed 
picture of the Achimov complex structure. The sections show a good correlation 
between GR values in the wells and the projected properties cube; there is a complex 
sedimentological nature of argillaceous and sandy formations. 
The structure of this sedimentary complex following the results of prediction is 
most likely typical. As an example, there is a fragment in one frame scale for the net 
pay map of Achimov horizon based on the transit wells of Verkhnekolik-Eganskoye 
field (Fig. 11f). The forecast net pay map shows the similarity of maximum and 
minimum distribution and the shape of geological bodies formed in similar 
depositional conditions. 
 

--- Sayfa 13 ---
Summary 
 
This paper presents a successful attempt to overcome the uncertainties in seismic-
stratigraphic interpretation of the complex rock section with good accuracy for the 
early stage of field maturity.  
 
The deliverable included the model of restored regression relationship between 
the values of natural radioactivity of rocks and seismic wave field attributes with 
an acceptable prediction quality. Acceptable quality of the forecast is confirmed 
both by model validation with complete removal of some data from the learning 
process, and by the data obtained following the results of a new well drilled 150 
meters away from the well from the learning sample. The regression relationship 
between the natural radioactivity of rocks and effective porosity of reservoirs was 
restored based on well tops data and log interpretation data - transition to reservoir 
properties of the target was carried out. 
 
The result was achieved with help of process stack consisting of machine learning 
methods, methods of enriching the source data with synthetic data, algorithms of 
creating new features using the function for regression model reconstruction as 
the target one, measurements of natural radioactivity of rocks, including for 
horizontal segments of wells.  
 
Two approaches were developed to enriching the source sample (geophysical data 
augmentations): spindle method and with help of Conditional Generative 
Adversarial Nets architecture (CGAN). The effect of reducing training error and 
improvement of model quality is noted when using the synthetic data set.  
 
Six features most significant for prediction were shown based on the calculation 
of Shapley index vectors for regression models. The top most relevant 542 
attributes were distributed by transformation categories. 
 
The magnitude of slices generalization is shown by the methods of geoinformatics 
on pseudo-terrain built based on seismic attribute slices and their derivatives as a 
way to formalize the ideas on dynamic sedimentation processes.  
 
At the same time, we should note the importance of both attributes without 
transformation and those transformed by clustering methods using k-mean 
algorithm, with help of the first derivative and the gradient between calculation 
windows, and the gradient between frequencies for spectral decomposition. 
Stratigraphic breakdown of the section by intervals of Achimov horizon, 
Bazhenov and Tyumen formations is also important for prediction. 
 
Developing the proposed approach on the basis of already acquired results, it is 
possible to progressively restore fluid saturation and rock permeability 
regression models, and then using the created reservoir simulation model or 
machine learning methods to make a forecast of field development scenarios and 
their economic efficiency. Application and expansion of the proposed process 
stack opens up a wide potential for prediction of development of fields at an 
early stage of exploration maturity and for decision-making process. It becomes 
possible to create a real-time loop with positive feedback between the seismic 
data, drilling results, and economic strategy of the company.  
 
 

--- Sayfa 14 ---
References 
 
1. 
Peyton Ch. Seismic stratigraphy. Moscow, Mir Publ., 1982. 374 p. 
2. 
Ampilov Yu.P. From seismic interpretation to modeling and evaluation of oil 
and gas fields. Moscow, SPECTR Publ., 2008. 384 p. 
3. 
Ampilov Yu.P. Seismic interpretation. Experience and problems. Moscow, 
Geoinformark Publ., 2004. 276 p. 
4. 
Methodological recommendations for the use of seismic data (2D, 3D) for 
calculating oil and gas reserves. V. B. Levyant, Yu. P. Ampilov, V. M. 
Glogovsky, V. V. Kolesov, M. B. Korostyshevsky, S. N. Ptetsov. Moscow, 
Federal Agency for Subsoil Use Publ., 2006. 39 p. 
5. 
Kontorovich V.A, Lapkovskiy V.V., Lunev B.V. The model of forming the 
wedge-like Neocomian complex of the Western Siberian oil and gas province 
in view of isostasy. Geology of oil and gas, 2014, no. 1, pp. 65–72. 
6. 
Nezhdanov A.A., Ponomarev V.A., Turenkov N.A., GorbunovS.A. Geology 
and oil and gas potential of Achimov formation of Western Siberia. Moscow, 
Academy of Sciences 
Publ., 2000, 247 p. 
7. 
Danenberg E.E., Belozerov V.B., Brylina N.A. Geological structure and 
petroleum potential of the Upper Jurassic-Lower Cretaceous sediments of the 
southeast of the Western Siberian Plate (Tomsk region). Tomsk, TPU Publ., 
2006. 291 p. 
8. 
Gurari F.G. The structure and conditions of formation of the clinoforms of 
the Neocomian deposits of the West Siberian late (the history of the 
formation of representations). Novosibirsk, SNIIGGiMS Publ., 2003. 141 p. 
9. 
Zakhryamina M.O. Principal model of Achimov sequence structure of Surgut 
and Nizhnevartov arches and its relation with Neocomian shelf beds. Oil and 
gas geology, 2014, no. 1, pp. 58–63. In Rus. 
10.  Zheng A., Casari A. Feature engineering for machine learning: principles and 
techniques for data scientists. Boston, O'Reilly, 2018. 218 p. 
11.  Belozerov V.B. The role of sedimentation models in the electro-facial 
analysis of terrigenous deposits. Bulletin of the Tomsk Polytechnic 
University.  Geo Аssets Engineering, 2011, V.319, no. 1, pp. 116-123. 
12.  Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-
Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative 
adversarial nets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 
2014. pp. 2672–2680. 
13.  Langr J., Bok V. GANs in action: deep learning with generative adversarial 
networks. New York, Manning Publ., 2019. 240 p. 
14.  Mehdi Mirza, Simon Osindero. Conditional Generative Adversarial Nets. 
arXiv.org, 2014, 7 p. Available at: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1411.1784.pdf 
(accessed 01 June 2021). arXiv:1411.1784v1 

--- Sayfa 15 ---
15.  Liudmila Ostroumova Prokhorenkova, Gleb Gusev, Aleksandr Vorobev, 
Anna Veronika Dorogush, and Andrey Gulin. Catboost: unbiased boosting 
with categorical features, Advances in Neural Information Processing 
Systems, 2018. pp. 6638–6648. 
16.  Guolin Ke, Qi Meng, Thomas Finley, Taifeng Wang, Wei Chen, Weidong 
Ma, Qiwei Ye, Tie-Yan Liu. LightGBM: A Highly Efficient Gradient 
Boosting Decision Tree. nips.cc, 2017, 9 p. Available at: 
https://papers.nips.cc/paper/6907-lightgbm-a-highly-efficient-gradient-
boosting-decision-tree.pdf (accessed 01 June 2021). 
17.  Tianqi Chen, Carlos Guestrin. XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System. 
arXiv.org, 2016, 13 p. Available at: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1603.02754.pdf 
(accessed 01 June 2021). arXiv:1603.02754v3 
18.  Scott Lundberg, Su-In Lee. A Unified Approach to Interpreting Model 
Predictions. arXiv.org, 2017, 10 p. Available at: 
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1705.07874.pdf (accessed 01 June 2021). 
arXiv:1705.07874v2 
19.  Calogero Schillaci, Andreas Braun, Jan Kropáček. Terrain analysis and 
landform recognition. researchgate.net, 2015, 44 p. Available at: 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Andreas-Braun-
9/publication/280736853_Terrain_analysis_and_landform_recognition/links/
55c483f808aebc967df2382c/Terrain-analysis-and-landform-recognition.pdf 
(accessed 01 June 2021).  
20.  Tou JT, Gonzalez R. Principles of Pattern Recognition. Addison-Wesley 
MA, 1974. 377 p. 
21.  K. M. Ting, I. H. Witten. Issues in Stacked Generalization. arXiv.org, 1999, 
19 p. Available at: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1105.5466.pdf (accessed 01 June 
2021). arXiv:1105.5466 
 
 
