
--- Sayfa 1 ---
Antagonising explanation and revealing bias directly through 
sequencing and multimodal inference 
 
Luís Arandas 
 INESC-TEC, Faculty of Engineering 
University of Porto 
luis.arandas@inesctec.pt 
Mick Grierson  
 CCI, University Arts London 
 London, United Kingdom  
 m.grierson@arts.ac.uk  
Miguel Carvalhais 
 i2ADS, Faculty of Fine Arts 
University of Porto 
 mcarvalhais@fba.up.pt 
 
ABSTRACT 
Deep generative models produce data according to a learned 
representation, e.g. diﬀusion models, through a process of 
approximation computing possible samples. Approximation can 
be understood as reconstruction and the large datasets used to 
train models as sets of records in which we represent the physical 
world with some data structure (photographs, audio recordings, 
manuscripts). During the process of reconstruction, e.g., image 
frames develop each timestep towards a textual input description. 
While moving forward in time, frame sets are shaped according to 
learned bias and their production, we argue here, can be 
considered as going back in time; not by inspiration on the 
backward diﬀusion process but acknowledging culture is 
speciﬁcally marked in the records. Futures of generative 
modelling, namely in ﬁlm and audiovisual arts, can beneﬁt by 
dealing with diﬀusion systems as a process to compute the future 
by inevitably being tied to the past, if acknowledging the records 
as to capture ﬁelds of view at a speciﬁc time, and to correlate with 
our own ﬁnite memory ideals. Models generating new data 
distributions can target video production as signal processors and 
by developing sequences through timelines we ourselves also go 
back to decade-old algorithmic and multi-track methodologies 
revealing the actual predictive failure of contemporary 
approaches to synthesis in moving image, both as relevant to 
composition and not explanatory. 
CCS CONCEPTS 
Computing methodologies • Artiﬁcial intelligence • Machine learning 
algorithms • Models of computation • Modelling and simulation 
KEYWORDS 
Artiﬁcial ﬁlmmaking, deep generative models, timelines and sequencers, 
multimodal inference, going back in time. 
ACM Reference format: 
1  Datasets (records) become predictive 
(revisiting, in part or completely) 
 
Deep generative models rely on large datasets to be trained and 
iteratively update their internal representation to better predict 
specific outcomes [6]. Depending on modality (image, audio and 
text) datasets are large, pursuing better futures of representation, 
in language-guided image diffusion with at least photographic or 
manuscript records [18]. Using trained models in production will 
reveal parts of the dataset used, even fleetingly in both visual and 
linguistic element composition, as their sampling is the model’s 
actual ability in resembling it (configured also in partial 
translation, see e.g. style-transfer [16]). 
 
Datasets are therefore, not just possibly always predictive in 
nature but also, we argue, with a prediction tied to the past as a 
specifically cherished characteristic of learning from data and 
supposed contextual experience [4]. Navigation-sampling or 
embedding-indexing of trained generative models in time shows 
what can be (not necessarily always) an accurate representation 
of the physical world, even if stripped from contextual meaning 
with an anchor of time, found through similarities and, e.g., 
emergent visual patterns at the specific period of training [19]. 
When posing a way to revisit these records using text-to-image 
models at least two methodologies can be established as practical: 
1) to use language (sets of text-prompts) to guide each timestep, 
and 2) to index specific dataset’s element (sets of text-prompts), 
following previously established techniques such as (e.g.) neural 
and vector search (archeologically, in part and as guidance to 
display the actual records). Jan Bot by Bram Loogman and Pablo 
Núñez Palma (2018) illustrates that by generating films using 
found footage from the Eye’s museum, as a predecessor to new 
possible language developments, see [17].  
 
Image diffusion systems with language guidance provide a 
multimodal methodology from (at least) two separate datasets, 
which through inference, will have their longevity analysed [9]. 
Inference or predictive behavior through trained models is a 
methodology to configure how something mapped (inscribed in a 
specific data distribution or pattern) could be [10], in the actual 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of 
this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). 
Luís Arandas, Mick Grierson, and Miguel Carvalhais. 2023. Antagonising 
explanation and revealing bias directly through sequencing and multimodal 
inference. In the 1st International Workshop on Explainable AI for the Arts 
(XAIxArts), ACM Creativity and Cognition (C&C) 2023. Online, 3 pages. 
https://xaixarts.github.io 

--- Sayfa 2 ---
The 1st International Workshop on Explainable AI for the Arts 
(XAIxArts) 
Arandas et al. 
 
 
 
implementation computing new data. Having the learned 
representation dictate which parameters can be scheduled and 
tractable through new programmatic and real-time algorithms, 
we introduce the concept of virtual timelines (synced event 
schedulers) as a potentially interesting candidate to reveal a 
model’s ability in reconstruction with practical media production 
once again, e.g. films and video sequences through synthesisers 
with extractive character [3], exhibiting specific cultural and 
ethical marks [8]. Filmmakers and practitioners are able to 
appropriate and build upon methodologies of parameter 
automation which should be model-specific and survey new 
emerging practices (e.g., artificial cameras and parameterised 
visual abstraction [2, 11]). 
2 Film (outputs) as both documental and 
experimental report (bias) 
 
Using the mentioned procedures in order to produce a film, image 
diffusion with classifier guidance (e.g. OpenCLIP and LAION-5B) 
will produce rough indeterminism opposed to classifier-free 
guidance methodologies, e.g. DDIM or PLMS [9]. This is an added 
layer of interest given established control of the torch compute 
graph, always tied to class approximation, see [13] on 
determinism and classifier-free guidance. To pull each frame-step 
towards a textual prompt element of a set, means to endure a 
divisive concept objectively inscribed in the network itself (label, 
feature vector). Format wars of coordination encompass, e.g., 
processing sets of text prompts directly even if they are outputs 
themselves, as summarisation and templates for scripts (an 
interface with the description of film shoot). Natural language 
processing and topic modelling [15], as well as grammar induction 
and understanding [7], specific divergence on futures of image 
description and derived systems promote and are relevant to what 
has been recognised as prompt engineering (negative weights and 
concept contrast) [12]. 
 
By designing interfaces cross-compatible with different language 
models, embedding coordination with very simple camera 
transforms can result in ways to mechanise image production 
once again (irregularly), which itself can be target of explanation 
and further study (regarding bias and failure) [20]. Engaging in 
practical methods to sequence parameters of the diffusion process 
with textual guidance can already establish some valid research 
paths, in which case: through variability in: 1) frame-skip-steps 
and spacing, 2) three-dimensional field of view planes, 3) 
language-guidance ratios (in frame-shot composition opposed to 
masking), 4) manuscript embedding and automatic keyframe 
organisation (e.g. films about specific text), 5) camera angles 
transform point of view shot templates; acknowledging moving 
image diffusion purely from language (50% skip over the first 
 
1 Twisting the parameters from e.g. a spaced diffusion iteration, can result on blurry 
and abstract shapes as it is unable to approximate the desired output coherently, 
which can result in very clear color feedback in moving image. 
frame, recursively) and the first frame from noise or a pure black 
pixel array. Variability and parameter establishment is to then 
maintain coordination between frame-by-frame diffusion, 
promoting: 1) a documental constitution for the ability to index 
specific records as influencers in the output [14], and 2) also an 
abstractive one, which can be developed by chaos in the 
established parameters 1. It is also possible for other separate 
models to target a function of establishing sets of prompts 
themselves [22], multimodality as a joint effort is criticised in the 
automatic photo narrator word.camera project by Ross Goodwin 
(2016), where brief poems from captured images are generated 
using neural networks and automatically printed. 
 
Video production stands on directional (according to perceptual 
laws) counters which process data in several dimensions. 
Backward diffusion processes create a disruption as if designed 
coming back from some visual disorder (practically, noise), but 
still moving forward in time [5], and with the development of each 
shot transform, language tweaks how the image should look like 
— shifting from still to moving image paradigms (e.g.) flow 
coherence, shot transition with semantic guidance, etc. Image 
diffusion models re-establish known theories of representation in 
moving image, as a new procedure evolving from what has been 
three-dimensional scene building (CGI) searching for another 
possible construction of worlds, see [1]. The works Parallel I-IV by 
Harun Farocki (2012-14) address the images of computer games, 
investigating their relationship with first person, and reality as 
“absent referent” constructed by algorithms2. 
3 Proposal and conclusion (futures) 
 
Our proposal bears no resemblance to what explanation stands for 
but can help produce scientific knowledge according to pre-
established 
practice 
exposing 
deep 
generative 
models’ 
reconstruction (and its bias) capabilities directly in moving image 
with language (text-prompt) guidance by process of sequencing 
(event scheduling) and embedding coordination. Image and 
language models (guided diffusion), and learning overall, will 
contain in themselves parts of culture at a specific time, if made 
by (photographic and linguistic) records which are captured by 
physical recorders (even as a made-up simulation themselves), 
grounded on realism ventures with increasingly higher 
resolutions and bigger datasets.  
 
We propose to target the development of a fair, reproducible 
(fuzzy), cross-modal and shared representation that can be used 
across different model (families) with variant architectures 
defining specific model (modal) functionalities of the whole film 
coordination, which is continuous and should provide semantic 
and formal parameter control, as a template (virtual timelines).  
2 e-flux, Exhibitions at Paço das Artes, Jan. 28,- (2016), Retrieved 27-05-2023. 

--- Sayfa 3 ---
 
 
 
Specifically in production today (multimodal inference), we have 
to work with what we define as bias in a learned representation, 
as it is specifically what defines a model’s ability in representing 
reality, practically time-stamped and used with both failure and 
success (objective document, abstractive resample), by resembling a 
specific dataset with (usually) pre-established and updatable 
structure [4]. We acknowledge there is danger in this statement 
when considering learning and agential systems as purely and 
blindly instrumental, as it has always been with conventional 
cameras, even if they became part of every material surface in 
every country of Europe. 
 
Therefore, and through this simple ideology we claim that by 
making films, in the end, we continue with a framework which is 
not of explanation3, is compositional by default, and should be 
treated carefully as a feature of what is in fact different from other 
generative systems which don’t learn. We reached a historical 
time in which immediate-mode virtual cameras architect image 
translation methodologies, making up new realities tied to actual 
lens (see image-to-text [21]) and each specific video output is itself 
conditioned by whatever culture. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
The research leading to these results was conducted at the UAL 
Creative Computing Institute (03-08/2022) and ﬁnancially 
supported by the Portuguese Foundation for Science and 
Technology (FCT), through the individual research grant 
2020.07619.BD and by the project “Experimentation in music in 
Portuguese culture: History, contexts and practices in the 20th and 
21st centuries” (POCI-01-0145- FEDER-031380), co-funded by the 
European 
Union 
through 
the 
Operational 
Program 
Competitiveness and Internationalisation, in its ERDF component, 
and by national funds, through the Portuguese FCT. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
1. 
Almeida, J., P. Moran, and P. Arantes, Harun Farocki: 
Programming the visible. e-flux journal, 2016. 
2. 
Brooks, T., A. Holynski, and A.A. Efros, Instructpix2pix: 
Learning to follow image editing instructions. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2211.09800, 2022. 
3. 
Crawford, K. and T. Paglen, Excavating AI: the politics of 
images in machine learning training sets. Ai & Society, 2021. 
4. 
Croitoru, F.-A., et al., Diffusion models in vision: A survey. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.04747, 2022. 
5. 
Dhariwal, P. and A. Nichol, Diffusion models beat gans on 
image synthesis. Advances in Neural Information Processing 
Systems, 2021. 34: p. 8780-8794. 
6. 
Foster, D., Generative Deep Learning: Teaching Machines to 
Paint, Write, Compose and Play. 2019. 
7. 
Glushchenko, A., et al. Programmatic link grammar induction 
for unsupervised language learning. in Artificial General 
Intelligence: 12th International Conference, AGI 2019, Shenzhen, 
China, August 6–9, 2019, Proceedings 12. 2019. Springer. 
 
3 We acknowledge the role of journalism and ethnographic work which does indeed 
share production methodologies with practice raised in this manuscript. 
8. 
Greene, D., A. Hoffmann, and L. Stark, Better, Nicer, Clearer, 
Fairer: A Critical Assessment of the Movement for Ethical 
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning. 2019. 
9. 
Kim, G., T. Kwon, and J.C. Ye. DiffusionCLIP: Text-Guided 
Diffusion Models for Robust Image Manipulation. in Proceedings 
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition. 2022. 
10. 
LeCun, Y., Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, Deep learning. Nature, 
2015. 521(7553): p. 436-44. 
11. 
Lee, H.-H. and A.X. Chang, Understanding Pure CLIP Guidance 
for Voxel Grid NeRF Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.15172, 
2022. 
12. 
Liu, V. and L.B. Chilton, Design Guidelines for Prompt 
Engineering Text-to-Image Generative Models, in CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2022. p. 
1-23. 
13. 
Nichol, A., et al., Glide: Towards photorealistic image 
generation and editing with text-guided diffusion models. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021. 
14. 
Nichols, B., Representing reality: Issues and concepts in 
documentary. 1991. 
15. 
Popa, C. and T. Rebedea. Bart-tl: Weakly-supervised topic label 
generation. in Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the 
European Chapter of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics: Main Volume. 2021. 
16. 
Radford, A., et al., Learning Transferable Visual Models From 
Natural Language Supervision. 2021. 
17. 
Somaini, A., On the altered states of machine vision. Trevor 
Paglen, Hito Steyerl, Grégory Chatonsky. AN-ICON. Studies in 
Environmental Images, no. 1 (2022): 91-111, 2022. 
18. 
Tian, C., et al., Deep learning on image denoising: An overview. 
Neural Networks, 2020. 131: p. 251-275. 
19. 
Vardi, G., On the implicit bias in deep-learning algorithms. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.12591, 2022. 
20. 
Xu, F., et al., Explainable AI: A Brief Survey on History, 
Research Areas, Approaches and Challenges, in Natural 
Language Processing and Chinese Computing. 2019. p. 563-574. 
21. 
Yu, J., et al., Coca: Contrastive captioners are image-text 
foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01917, 2022. 
22. 
Zhou, K., et al., Learning to prompt for vision-language models. 
International Journal of Computer Vision, 2022. 130(9): p. 
2337-2348. 
  
 
