
--- Sayfa 1 ---
1 
 
A computed 95% confidence interval does cover the true value with 
probability 0.95 – epistemically interpreted 
 
Dan Hedlin 
Dept. of statistics 
Stockholm University 
106 91 Stockholm  
Sweden 
 
Abstract 
Suppose the lifetime of a large sample of batteries in routine use is measured. A confidence interval is 
computed to 394 ± 1.96 ⋅4.6 days. The standard interpretation is that if we repeatedly draw samples 
and compute confidence intervals, about 95% of the intervals will cover the unknown true lifetime. 
What can be said about the particular interval 394 ± 1.96 ⋅4.6 has not been clear. We clarify this by 
using an epistemic interpretation of probability. The conclusion is that a realised (computed) 
confidence interval covers the parameter with the probability given by the confidence level is a valid 
statement, unless there are relevant and recognisable subsets of the sample. 
 
Keywords and phrases: interpretation of confidence interval, epistemic probability, frequentist 
inference, recognisable subsets. 
 
1. Introduction 
Burnham, Lafta, Doocy and Roberts (2006) estimated the excess mortality after the invasion of the 
US-led coalition of Iraq in March 2003. Their estimate was 654,965 excess Iraqi deaths as a 
consequence of the war with the 95 percent confidence interval 392,979–942,636. The estimate was 
based on a probability sample with 1,849 responding households. The study was debated, sometimes 
animatedly. Marker (2008) reviews the methods of the study. He also provides some references to for 
example newspaper articles that scrutinised and criticised the study.  
 
With this motivating example in mind, we focus on the interpretation of the confidence interval in a 
frequency context. The method of confidence intervals is usually viewed as a process that results in a 
relative frequency. We are now interested in the interpretation of the realised (computed) confidence 
interval. One common interpretation starts with the fact that the true excess mortality, denoted by 𝜃, 
and the end points of the interval 392,979, 942,636 are three numbers. As such, 𝜃 is either inside the 
interval 392,979–942,636, or it is not. Or in other words, the probability that 𝜃 is inside the interval is 
either 0 or 1. With this view on a confidence interval I cannot see any practical use of the concept of 
confidence intervals, and, as a consequence, I would find it hard to gauge the accuracy of the estimate 
654,965. Another common and fundamentally different interpretation is that the interval does say 
something about the plausible error due to sampling. For example that the confidence interval provides 
a set of plausible values of 𝜃. But then the question is: what do we mean by ‘plausible’ here? Despite 
the lack of clarity the use of confidence intervals is ubiquitous. As an example of how confidence 
intervals may be reported in practice, see Sturgis et al. (2018).  
 
After Jerzy Neyman’s reading of his paper (Neyman, 1934) before the Royal Statistical Society, 
Arthur Bowley famously called the confidence interval a ‘confidence trick’ and went on to say: ‘I 
think we are in the position of knowing that either an improbable event has occurred or the proportion 
in the population is within the limits. To balance these things we must make an estimate and form a 
judgment as to the likelihood of the proportion in the universe’ (Bowley, 1934, p. 609).   
 
Neyman focuses in his rejoinder (p. 623-625) first on Bowley’s comment on the likelihood (chance) 
that the parameter is in the interval and notes that to say something about the probability of a 
parameter calls for Bayesian analysis. Then Neyman goes on to focus on Bowley’s first comment, that 

--- Sayfa 2 ---
2 
 
all we know from an estimated confidence interval is either that something has occurred or that it has 
not occurred. Although Neyman acknowledges that Bowley is correct in saying that there is not much 
to say about the probability of a realised confidence interval, he states that his method (my italics) of 
confidence intervals should have a frequency interpretation.  
 
Salsburg (2001, p. 122) believes that what is missing in the method of confidence intervals is the 
answer to this question: ’probability of what?’ Salsburg captures the difficulty in one striking 
sentence: ‘Bowley’s problem with this procedure is one that has bedevilled the idea of confidence 
bounds since then’. 
 
It is clear from Neyman’s rejoinder that he views the method of confidence interval as a process by 
which a statement about the relative frequency is obtained. Neyman (1977, p. 118-119) gives two 
examples of statements that are results of incorrectly substituting realised values for the random 
variables in expression (1), which is given below: 𝑃(1 ≤5 ≤3|𝜃= 5) = 0.95  and 
𝑃(1 ≤2 ≤3|𝜃= 2) = 0.95. Neyman (1977, p. 119) even spells out RELATIVE FREQUENCY in 
capital letters. Still, Salsburg’s question is there: 𝑃(1 ≤𝜃≤3) = 0.95, probability of what? 
 
It is embarrassing that the concept of confidence interval, which is so important and so often used for 
the interpretation of statistical estimates, is still unclear 90 years after Neyman (1934) introduced both 
the concept of and the term confidence interval. I shall give a number of examples of various 
interpretations and vague statements. However, I believe the solution to the ambiguity and elusive 
clarity is quite simple: we should view a computed (realised) confidence interval in the light of an 
epistemic interpretation of probability while paying attention to the Fisherian concept of relevant and 
recognisable subsets.  
 
Episteme is explained in the Oxford English Dictionary as ‘scientific knowledge, a system of 
understanding; spec. (Foucault's term for) the body of ideas which shape the perception of knowledge 
in a particular period’ with the ancient Greek origin meaning knowledge, understanding, skill and 
scientific knowledge. An anecdote illustrates the notion of epistemic probability. I decided to start a 
talk on philosophy of probability in a theatre-like hall by throwing a dice on stage. I took a good look 
at the outcome and asked the conferencier: ‘what’s the probability the outcome is 3?’ One sixth he said 
(a tad anxiously). Then the next speaker, who the organisers had put in the first row right in front of 
the stage, said that to him the probability was one fourth. From his position he could see that the side 
of the dice had one single spot, and assuming that the dice was of standard construction, he could 
deduce that the far side must have six spots. So only four possible outcomes remained to him. Thus we 
had three probabilities, 1/6 (based on no knowledge), ¼ (based on partial knowledge) and 1 (because I 
knew it). Note that our probabilities do not have to be viewed as subjective probabilities. Everyone did 
a logical assessment based on facts (+ one assumption).  
 
The idea to view confidence intervals in the light of epistemic probability is not new. Schweder (2018) 
suggests that. Pawitan, Lee and Lee (2023) investigate the issue if and under what conditions a 
nominal coverage probability applies to a realised confidence interval. They define the confidence 
level 𝛼 to have the property ‘epistemic confidence’ if ‘it is protected from the Dutch book’ (see 
Vineberg, 2012, for the concept of Dutch book), assuming common interest and flow of information 
among people interested in the confidence interval at hand. What it basically means is that 𝛾= 1 −𝛼 
must follow the laws of probability and that there is an intersubjective agreement of the value of 𝛾 
(Gillies, 2000, p. 170-171). One condition is that there are no relevant subsets (we return to this in Sec. 
6). The reasoning of Pawitan et al. (2023) is likelihood-based, in contrast to the current paper.  
 
2. Definition of a confidence interval  
 
We focus for simplicity on random sampling from finite populations and confidence sets that are in the 
form of a single interval. Let 𝜃 be a real-valued parameter of interest, for example the finite population 
average 𝜃= 𝑦̅𝑈= ∑
𝑌𝑘∕𝑁
𝑘∈𝑈
, where 𝑌1, 𝑌2, … , 𝑌𝑁 are random variables and U is the population with 
N units. The population vector is 𝐘= (𝑌1, 𝑌2, … , 𝑌𝑁)′. Let 𝐘𝑠 be the sample vector. A number of 

--- Sayfa 3 ---
3 
 
subsets of U are possible samples through choice of sampling method. In the context here, it suffices 
to say that there are B possible samples, B being a finite number. Define a confidence interval as 
 
𝑃(𝐿(𝐘𝑠) ≤𝜃≤𝑈(𝐘𝑠)) = 1 −𝛼   
(1) 
 
where 𝐿(𝐘𝑠) and 𝑈(𝐘𝑠) are the random lower and upper confidence limits and 1 −𝛼 is the confidence 
level. For simplicity we consider only 𝛼= 0.95. We denote the confidence interval by 𝐶(𝐘𝑠) =
(𝐿(𝐘𝑠), 𝑈(𝐘𝑠)). A sample is collected, 𝐲𝑠 is observed and 𝐶(𝐘𝑠) is estimated with 𝐶(𝐲𝑠). We shall say 
that 𝐶(𝐲𝑠) is the realised value of 𝐶(𝐘𝑠), and use the terms realised, estimated and computed 
interchangeably. If (1) is true, what is the probability in (2)? Is it meaningful to talk about such a 
probability? We assume that the sample is large; the focus here is on the interpretation of (2). 
 
𝑃(𝐿(𝐲𝑠) ≤𝜃≤𝑈(𝐲𝑠)) = 1 −𝛼  
(2) 
 
In model-based frequentist inference, the random sample is conditioned on and the limits in (1) are 
functions of the random variable 𝐘𝑠. In design-based survey sampling frequentist inference, moments 
are taken over the random sample s. A 95% confidence interval 𝐶𝐼(𝑠) is an interval such that the 
probability that 𝐶𝐼(𝑠) covers the unknown finite-population parameter 𝜃 is 𝑃(𝐶𝐼(𝑠) ∋𝜃) = 0.95. See 
Särndal, Swensson and Wretman (1992, p. 55). The sampling design makes B samples possible to be 
realised. If the sample is large for all B samples, approximately 95% of those would cover 𝜃, see 
Särndal et al. (1992) and references therein. My arguments do not depend on whether we consider 
model-based or design-based inference.  
 
3. Interpretations of confidence intervals in the literature 
 
A realised confidence interval, like the one in (2), is usually interpreted with its long-run relative 
frequency in mind, as Example 1 illustrates. The texts in Examples 1-2 and 4-11 are close to the 
source, although not necessarily direct quotations unless indicated. My interest in these example 
focuses on how authors approach (2). 
 
Example 1 
Thompson (1997, p. 144) conveys the idea behind classical sampling inference by way of an example. 
In an urn with N balls there are M white ones. A without-replacement simple random sample s of size 
n is going to be drawn. The random number of white balls in s is 𝑚𝑠. The sample is drawn; it contains 
𝑚𝑠0 white balls. With 𝑁= 100, 𝑛= 10, 𝑚𝑠0 = 4, Thompson estimates a 95% confidence interval for 
M to [14,72] and goes on to say: ‘Such intervals have the property that if the sampling procedure is 
repeated again and again, the long-run relative frequency of non-coverage will approximate [5%]’. 
(Continued in Example 9). 
 
Example 2 
A sample is drawn in order to estimate 𝜃, and a confidence is estimated. In their section 9.2.4, with the 
heading Bayesian intervals, Casella and Berger (2002) state that within classical statistics the 
parameter 𝜃 is fixed and the random confidence interval is also fixed after having been realised. So, as 
neither 𝜃 nor the realised interval moves, 𝜃 is either in the interval or it is outside. The probability that 
𝜃 is inside is either 0 or 1. 
 
Next example is taken from my own work as a statistician (modified and anonymised for simplicitly 
and confidentiality). 
 
Example 3  
An entrepreneur in the health sector invoices a large hospital for a number of treatments of patients. 
The hospital takes a random sample of invoices and inspects the associated health records that the 
entrepreneur has written for each treatment. The hospital estimates that the entrepreneur has 
incorrectly invoiced 10,000 ±1,000 money units where (9,000, 11,000) is a 99% confidence interval. 

--- Sayfa 4 ---
4 
 
They also compute a 95% confidence interval. The hospital sues the entrepreneur with the aim of 
salvaging at least the worth of the lower bound of the 99% interval. If the hospital had conducted a 
census, and all invoices had passed through the legal system, a total of 𝜃 money units would have been 
found to be incorrectly invoiced. However, following the interpretation of a confidence interval in 
Example 1 and in particular Example 2, we cannot say much about the probability that the interval 
(9,000, 11,000) contains 𝜃. So, is the confidence interval useless in this type of situation? And if it is 
useless here, in what situation would it be useful? 
 
The next few examples seem to express that interpretation of a confidence interval is a matter of 
confidence or even hope.  
 
Example 4 
Cochran (1977, p. 12). If a probability sample of batteries in routine use in a large factory shows an 
average life of 394 days, with a standard error 4.6 days, the chances are 99 in 100 that the average life 
in the population of batteries lies between 394 ± 2.58 ⋅4.6 days.  
 
One may be forgiven if one suspects that Cochran dodges the term ‘probability’ in ‘chances are’. 
 
Example 5 
Wooldridge (2013, p. 138-139). If random samples were obtained over and over again, with 𝐿(𝐘𝑠) and 
𝑈(𝐘𝑠) computed each time, then the (unknown) population value 𝜃 would lie in the interval 𝐶(𝐘𝑠) for 
95% of the samples. Unfortunately, for the single sample that we use to construct the confidence 
interval, we do not know whether 𝜃 is actually contained in the interval. We hope we have obtained a 
sample that is one of the 95% of all samples where the interval estimate contains 𝜃, but we have no 
guarantee. 
 
Example 6 
Agresti (2002, p. 411). The sample proportions of approval of a prime minister’s performance are 0.59 
and 0.55 in the first and second survey. Agresti suggests an estimator for the variance of dependent 
proportions. Using this, he computes the confidence interval for the difference in approval rating as  
(-0.06, -0.02) and formulates his conclusion in the following way: ‘The approval rating appears to 
have dropped between 2 and 6 [percentage units]’. 
 
However, in the next example, Foreman (1991) ventures to use the term probability. 
 
Example 7 
Foreman (1991, p. 42). Suppose the turnover of a business is estimated as ten million and that the 
standard error of that estimate is half a million. ‘Then, on the supposition that the estimate is unbiased 
and that its sampling distribution approximates a normal distribution, it may be stated with 95% 
confidence (or probability 𝑝= 0.95) that the actual turnover… is within the interval’ 10 ⋅106 ±
1.96 ⋅0.5 ⋅106. 
 
Cox and Hinkley (1974) use in the next example the word ‘consistent’ (in the colloquial meaning) but 
also seem to express some aversion in their use of the word ‘legalistic’. 
 
Example 8 
Cox and Hinkley (1974, p. 209) describe the procedure to construct a confidence interval as something 
‘physical’, which in principle could be checked by experiments. Nowadays we often make simulation 
studies where we draw a large number of samples and compute a coverage probability based on 
variance estimates. Such a simulation does provide a ‘physical’ interpretation of a confidence interval. 
Cox and Hinkley recommend that a system of confidence intervals is computed, in which the 
confidence level is varied, as opposed to selecting one confidence level in advance and compute only 
one interval. On p. 209 they say:  
 

--- Sayfa 5 ---
5 
 
‘In many ways a system of confidence limits calculated from data corresponds to treating the 
parameter as if, in the light of the data, it is a random variable Θ with cumulative distribution function 
implicitly defined by 𝑃(Θ ≤𝑡𝛼) = 1 −𝛼’, where 𝑡𝛼 is the upper confidence limit in a one-sided 
interval.  
 
‘The distinction, emphasized in the standard treatments of confidence intervals, is that in the 
hypothetical repetitions that give physical meaning to 𝑃(𝑋≤𝑥), where X is a random variable, we 
regard x as a fixed arbitrary constant; more generally we consider the probability that X falls in some 
fixed set. On the other hand, in [a computed confidence interval] it is 𝑡𝛼 that varies in hypothetical 
repetitions, not 𝜃: hence it is not legitimate to treat 𝜃 as a random variable. Nevertheless, for many 
purposes the distinction appears to be a rather legalistic one’.  
   
On page 214 Cox and Hinkley (1974) describe the procedure to construct a confidence interval from 
an acceptance region and write that the procedure ‘suggests that we can regard confidence limits as 
specifying those parameter values consistent with the data at some level’. One reason for data not 
being consistent with the probability statement (1) is that (1) may not hold conditionally on ancillary 
statistics.  
 
Example 9 (continued from Example 1) 
The realised confidence interval is ’a reasonable expression of inference about M. In intuitive terms, 
the computed 95% confidence interval for M is compatible with the inference that, while we would 
guess that M is in some interval around 40, we would be surprised to find it as low as 13 or as high as 
73.’ (Thompson, 1997, p. 144). However, as Thompson points out, an important difference between 
balls in an urn and, for example, an official statistics or a social survey is that the units in the latter are 
to a larger extent distinguishable. Individuals in a social survey may have labels (civic number, 
address) and auxiliary variables. The computed confidence interval may not be consistent with prior 
information or belief about the population (see examples in Section 6 below). 
 
I interpret ‘consistent’ in Example 8 as ‘given the data, there are no reasons not to believe that the 
computed confidence interval covers the parameter with a probability approximately equal to 0.95’. 
Example 9 provides one reason why we would not trust a realised confidence interval. We return to 
this in Section 6. 
 
Like Cox and Hinkley in Example 8, Cramér (1956) seems to come close to saying that the probability 
by which a computed confidence interval covers 𝜃 is 0.95. 
 
Example 10 
Cramér (1956, p. 183). Suppose we conduct a series of experiments in which the parameters 𝜃, 𝜎 and 
the number of units n vary arbitrarily from experiment to experiment. For each experiment we 
compute a confidence interval and make the statement that 𝜃 is between the confidence limits. These 
limits will in general vary from experiment to experiment. The probability that our statement is correct 
is in each experiment 95%. If we consistently apply this rule, we would expect that 5% of our 
statements are false. The computed confidence interval gives us therefore a rule for estimation of 𝜃 
that works with a constant failure risk of 5%. 
 
Example 2 contrasts in an interesting way with the following example. Examples 2 and 11, it seems to 
me, capture the ambivalence in the interpretation of a confidence interval.  
 
Example 11 
Casella and Berger (2002, p. 421) : ‘...the confidence interval, the set in the parameter space with 
plausible values of 𝜇…’ (my italics). 
 
 

--- Sayfa 6 ---
6 
 
4. Theories of probability 
 
Four broad theories (or interpretations) of probability are often mentioned (Gillies, 2000):  
1. Logical. The degree of rational belief. The anecdote with the dice in Sec. 1 is one example. 
2. Subjective, the degree of belief of a particular individual, and intersubjective, a consensus in a 
group of people 
3. Frequency 
4. Propensity, which is wide and multifaceted class of theories. Popper (1959) advocated one 
version. 
 
Theories 1 and 2 are often called epistemic or subjective probabilities. The latter term is unfortunate as 
the same term refers both to the group and to one member of the group. Theories 3 and 4 are referred 
to as objective, scientific or aleatory (Gillies, 2000, p. 20). The division between epistemic and 
objective probabilities makes many see probability as being Janus-faced.  
 
Daston (1988, p. 197) gives this reason as to why no distinction was made between epistemic and 
objective probability in the past: ‘Experience generated belief and probability by the repeated 
correlation of sensations which the mind reproduced in associations of ideas. The more constant and 
frequent the observed correlation, the stronger the mental association, which in turn intensified 
probability and belief. Hence, the objective probabilities of experience and the subjective probabilities 
of belief were, in a well-ordered mind, mirror images of one another.’ 
  
One way to understand subjective probability is to regard it as a degree of belief. It is ‘a causal 
property … which we can express vaguely as the extent of which we are prepared to act on it’ (Frank 
Ramsay, cited in Gillies, 2000, p. 54). Suppose you are tempted to bet on a game between teams A and 
B. If you bet 𝑢2 money units on ‘A win’, and A come out victorious, then you obtain 𝑢1 money units 
plus your own bet. A fair bet is characterised by a zero expected profit, that is, 𝑢1𝑝−𝑢2(1 −𝑝) = 0 
where p is the probability for team A win, implying that the fair bet is characterised by  𝑝= 𝑢2 ∕
(𝑢1 + 𝑢2) and hence that the fair (statistical) odds is 𝑝(1 −𝑝)
⁄
= 𝑢2 ∕𝑢1. Imagine that three odds, 
𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑠1, 𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑠2 and 𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑠3, are offered to person D, who does not know the real value of p. Suppose 
𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑠1 is higher than the fair one, that is, 𝑝1 (1 −𝑝1)
⁄
> 𝑝∕(1 −𝑝), where 𝑝1 is the probability that 
corresponds to 𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑠1. If person D bets on 𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑠1, he effectively believes that A win with probability 
𝑝1 and he will lose money in the long run. As discussed by Daston (1988), person D will with 
experience learn that he plays too hard (ignoring that there are psychological gambling issues). 
Suppose now that 𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑠2 and 𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑠3 are 𝑝2 (1 −𝑝2)
⁄
< 𝑝3 (1 −𝑝3)
⁄
< 𝑝∕(1 −𝑝). If he bets on 
𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑠2 but not on 𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑠3, he is too risk averse. The rational choice is to play on an odds which is as 
close as possible to the fair one, but not higher. This in turn implies that D is prepared to act on a 
subjected probability up to p, but not further. See also Gillies (2000, p. 55) for a trick of how to tease 
the subjective probability out of a person who is inclined to ‘cheat’ to make an expected profit. The 
ratio 𝑝= 𝑢2 ∕(𝑢1 + 𝑢2) is called ‘betting quotient’. 
 
As an argument why considering betting to be relevant to other decisions, Frank Ramsay writes: 
‘Whenever we go to the station we are betting that a train will really run, and if we had not sufficient 
degree of belief in this we should decline the bet and stay at home.’ (Cited in Gillies, 2000, p. 54). 
 
Also, think of evidence e as observations or some assumed state of affairs (the trains are usually on 
time, and there is this morning no reason to believe otherwise), and hypothesis h as a statement about 
the unknown state of affairs (the train will run). If a person’s subjective probability of h given e is 
high, then that would give that person good reasons for expecting the unknown facts described by h 
(Carnarp, 1950, p. 164). Looking back to Example 4, Cochran (1977) seems to come close to a 
subjective probability.  
 
Not everybody accepts that a thrown dice has a probability of a certain outcome; if it is a 3, then it is 
what it is, whether we have observed the outcome or not. However, the Royal Society (2020, p. 12) 
disagree: ‘It is a common misapprehension that probabilities can only be used for future events with 

--- Sayfa 7 ---
7 
 
some randomness. While it is true that an event has either happened or not, many statisticians will feel 
that it is reasonable to assign probabilities to our personal uncertainty about unknown facts.’ The 
document of the Royal Society addresses the use of probability in legal contexts. What is the 
probability that a fragment of glass, which was found on a suspect’s clothing, came from a particular 
broken window? If you do not accept that a thrown dice has a probability for a certain outcome (which 
has already happened), then you cannot reasonably accept that there is a probability that the fragment 
came from a specific window, because then you would rather think ‘either it did, or it did not’. 
 
Fisher (1958, p. 386-387) clearly had an epistemic interpretation in mind when he wrote: ’Probability 
is… a well specified state of logical uncertainty…. Let us consider any uncertain event. A child is 
going to be born…[and being interested in the sex of the child] we are in a state of uncertainty’. A 
parent finds out that in 51 per cent of births, the baby is a boy. Fisher goes on to say: ‘he [the 
dad]…informs us that the probability of a boy is 51 per cent, having made reference to this measurable 
reference set as the basis of his statement.’  
 
5. The main argument and three counterarguments 
 
Consider two experiments. In the first one you have 100 balls, 95 of which are blue and 5 are red, and 
one ball is going to be selected at random. That is, 𝑃(𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑒) = 0.95. In the second experiment the balls 
are behind a screen and one ball has already been selected at random. Most statisticians (and indeed 
most non-statisticians) would now say the probability that the colour of the ball is blue is 0.95. Now 
suppose the set of balls are B confidence intervals and 95% of them have the property E, where E is 
the event that the confidence interval covers 𝜃. One confidence interval has been selected randomly.  
There are two, or possibly three, reasons why one would not accept that a confidence interval which 
has already ‘been selected’ (realised) has E with probability 0.95. The counterarguments are: 
1. There is no such a thing as epistemic probabilities  
2. We might gain some knowledge by inspecting the realised sample that would make us distrust 
the confidence interval 
3. We should not, or cannot, mix subjective probabilities with frequencies 
I have said enough about counterargument 1. Next I shall discuss counterargument 3, and in Section 6 
discuss the interesting counterargument 2.  
 
A subjective probability may serve as an estimate of a relative frequency. A rigorous argument is 
given by Carnarp (1950, §41), which is now summarised briefly, although recast to the confidence 
interval problem. Denote the possible confidence intervals by 𝐶(𝑖)(𝐲𝑠), 𝑖= 1,2, … , 𝐵, and let 𝐸𝑖 be the 
event that 𝐶(𝑖)(𝐲𝑠) covers 𝜃. Suppose all B confidence intervals have been realised. Let r be the 
proportion of the B confidence intervals which cover 𝜃. Person A, with no knowledge of the property 
𝐸𝑖 of any of the realised confidence intervals, believes that a fair odds for each 𝐸𝑖 is 𝑢2 ∕𝑢1, so her 
subjective probability is the betting quotient 𝑞= 𝑢2/(𝑢1 + 𝑢2). If A places a bet on each one of the B 
confidence intervals, her expected gain is 𝑟𝑢1 −(1 −𝑟)𝑢2 = 𝑟(𝑢1 + 𝑢2) −(𝑢1 + 𝑢2)𝑞=
(𝑢1 + 𝑢2)(𝑟−𝑞). Thus, her betting quotient need be 𝑞= 𝑟 for it to be fair (for the expected gain to 
be zero). In other words, her best subjective probability is also her estimate of the relative frequency r 
of the 𝐶(𝑖)(𝐲𝑠) that cover 𝜃. Hence, a tenable subjective probability is also an estimate of the relative 
frequency. This argument seems to be what Daston (1988), cited above, discusses. 
 
 
6. Relevant and recognisable subsets 
Now we turn to counterargument 2. A statistician may, and often does, identify relevant and 
recognisable subsets (a term borrowed from R.A. Fisher) in the sample. Three examples follow. 
 
The proportions of men and women in the sample may be very different from known population 
proportions. If gender is associated with the study variable then the sample mean of a simple random 
sample is in the presence of sample imbalance conditionally biased. In the Burnham et al. (2006) study 
there were more violent deaths among men than women, so if the sample had contained an excess of 

--- Sayfa 8 ---
8 
 
women, the estimate would have been biased low (unless successfully adjusted for with estimation, 
e.g. poststratification). 
 
Brewer (2002, p. 271) tells the story when he as a young statistician discovered that the two primary 
sampling units in one stratum both were railway junctions and therefore were atypical in terms of their 
workforce composition. Brewer’s supervisor told him to discard one of them and select another one 
randomly. That is, the supervisor asked Brewer to tamper with a realised probability sample. But, 
although the young Brewer had misgivings, the experienced Brewer believed that ‘it was better to 
have a reasonably well-balanced sample that a pure probability sample that was obviously badly 
balanced’ (p. 271). 
 
When inspecting a computed confidence interval you might as an experience practitioner see that it is 
very wide, and identify the reason: one large value of the study variable.  
 
Fisher (1959, p. 23) requires two properties: ‘No subset can be recognized having a different 
probability. Such subsets must always exist; it is required that no one of them shall be recognizable. 
This is a postulate of ignorance’. Women form the subset in the first example. In the second example 
the subset is all non-railway junctions, which was conspicuously empty. In the third example the large 
value constitutes the subset. 
 
The three examples illustrate reasons why there may be a gap between our prior knowledge and the 
computed confidence interval. In all three examples we cannot have full confidence in the confidence 
interval. Really, we should be reluctant to publish such confidence intervals (unless, again, we have 
been able adjust for the issues, with estimation). 
 
To define ‘recognisable and relevant subsets’ we first introduce a vector of auxiliary variables 𝐱𝑘 for 
unit k, which could be for example sex and age. Suppose 𝑃(𝐿(𝒀𝑠) ≤𝜃≤𝑈(𝒀𝑠)) = 1 −𝛼 where 𝒀𝑠 
is a stochastic vector of sample values, but 𝑃(𝐿(𝒀𝑠) ≤𝜃≤𝑈(𝒀𝑠)|𝑅(𝐲𝑠, 𝑓(𝐱𝑠), 𝑓(𝐱𝑈)) ≠1 −𝛼, 
where 𝑅(⋅,⋅,⋅) is a statistic, which may depend on sample data 𝐲𝑠, 𝐱𝑠 auxiliary variables in the sample 
and 𝐱𝑈, auxiliary variables in the population (or stratum or cluster depending on application). The 
subscript U indicates that 𝐱𝑈 contains other information about the population than what could be 
deduced from the sample. The statistic depends on auxiliary variables through a function 𝑓(⋅ ). If there 
is such a statistic 𝑅(⋅,⋅,⋅), we say that it induces ’relevant and recognisable subsets’, similarly to 
Buehler (1959) and Pawitan et al. (2023). In the Burnham et al’s (2006) study (in our thought-
experiment with an identified excess of women) and in Brewer’s (2002) survey, 𝑥𝑘 is a binary that 
takes value 1 if unit k is a woman or a non-railway junction, 𝑓(𝐱𝑠) is the proportion of women or non-
railway junctions in the sample, respectively. In the study of excess mortality in Iraq, 𝑓(𝐱𝑈) is the 
proportion of women in the country. In Brewer’s survey 𝑓(𝐱𝑈) is the known proportion of railway 
junctions in the stratum, and the two induced subsets are the whole sample and the empty set. In 
neither case 𝑓(𝐱𝑈) needed to be known with high accuracy for one to realise that the sample was 
imbalanced. In the third example, where the sample contained a large value that made the confidence 
interval very wide, the relation between 𝑓(𝐱𝑈) and 𝑓(𝐱𝑠) shows that the sample is imbalanced. Even 
if there was in this third example no auxiliary variable, the statistician may still see that the sample is 
imbalanced by making an experienced judgement of what the population mean 𝐲̅𝑈 should be compared 
to the observed 𝐲̅𝑠. 
 
Pawitan et al. (2023) proves that, under some conditions, there cannot be any relevant subsets. Here it 
is interesting to note Fisher’s (1959) statement: “Such subsets must always exist”. The reason why 
Pawitan et al. (2023) are able to prove their theorem is that they work with likelihoods, for example, 
that a sample is drawn from a gamma distribution. Fisher on the other hand is thinking of a real-life 
population. Suppose you have interviewed people in Iraq. In that case there may be unobserved 
variables that, if known, would make you realise that the sample is imbalanced. Recall Thompson’s 
remark in Example 9 above that there is a difference between official statistics or a social survey and 
‘balls in an urn’.  

--- Sayfa 9 ---
9 
 
 
Pawitan et al. go on to give conditions for 1 −𝛼 being epistemic.  
 
7. Prosecutor’s fallacy in relation to this discussion 
Suppose we are about to construct a 95% confidence interval from the null hypothesis 𝐻0:𝜃= 𝜃0. The 
acceptance region 𝐴(𝜃0) is given by sample data 𝐲𝑠 that lead to a computed estimate 𝜃̂(𝐲𝑠) for which 
 𝜃0 −1.96√𝑉(𝜃̂(𝐲𝑠)) ≤𝜃̂(𝐲𝑠) ≤𝜃0 + 1.96√𝑉(𝜃̂(𝐲𝑠)) 
 
 
(3) 
 
We may invert (3) into a confidence interval in the usual way to 
 𝜃̂(𝐲𝑠) −1.96√𝑉(𝜃̂(𝐲𝑠)) ≤𝜃≤𝜃̂(𝐲𝑠) + 1.96√𝑉(𝜃̂(𝐲𝑠)).  
 
(4) 
 
Since (3) defines an acceptance region 𝐴(𝜃0), 𝑃(𝜃̂(𝐘𝑠) ∈𝐴(𝜃0)|𝜃= 𝜃0) = 0.95. However, if we now 
claim that 𝑃(𝜃= 𝜃0|𝜃̂(𝐘𝑠) ∈𝐴(𝜃0)) = 0.95, then ‘prosecutor’s fallacy’ may come up in the mind of 
a statistician (e.g. Taylor, 2018).  
 
What is the difference between prosecutor’s fallacy and the probability referred to in Example 7? They 
are probabilities of different events. In the fallacy it is the illegitimate interpretation of the parameter 𝜃 
being a random number. In Example 7 and other examples above it is the probability (epistemically 
interpreted) that we have obtained sample i and confidence interval 𝐶(𝑖)(𝐲𝑠). This may be the answer 
to Salsburg’s (2001, p. 122) question ‘probability of what?’. 
 
8. Discussion and conclusion 
There are disparate interpretations of confidence interval in the literature, as shown in Examples 1-11. 
These examples suggest that statisticians have an awkward relationship to the interpretation of 
confidence intervals. 
 
There are situations where the computed confidence interval is not convincing. Many of these are well 
known to practitioners. In situations such as those given in Sec. 6, the computed confidence interval is 
not consistent with our prior knowledge or belief. Quite simply: there is something wrong with the 
confidence interval.  
 
Unless there are relevant and recognisable subsets (as defined in Sec. 6), it is not incorrect to say that 
computed 95% confidence interval covers the parameter with probability 0.95, that is, (2) is valid. 
This epistemic interpretation of that probability has the additional advantage that it defines the term 
‘confidence’.   
 
One final thought about the 90 years of bewilderment since Neyman (1934): it might be a widely held 
view in the statistical community that a probability should either be seen as subjective or viewed in a 
frequency context that has created a barrier that made us fail to see the fairly simple solution.  
 
References 
Agresti, A. (2002). Categorical data analysis. 2nd ed. Hoboken: Wiley.  
 
Bowley, A.L. (1934). Discussion on Dr Neyman’s paper. Meeting in the Royal Statistical Society, 
June 19th, 1934. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 97(4), 607-610. 
 
Brewer, K.R.W. (2002). Combined Survey Sampling Inference: Weighing Basu’s Elephants. London: 
Arnold.  
Buehler, R.J. (1959). Some validity criteria for statistical inferences. The annals of mathematical 
statistics, 30(4), 845-863. 

--- Sayfa 10 ---
10 
 
 
Burnham, G., Lafta, R., Doocy, S. and Roberts, L. (2006). Mortality after the 2003 invasion of Iraq: a 
cross-sectional cluster sample survey. Lancet, 368, 1421–1428. 
 
Carnarp, R. (1950). Logical foundations of probability. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. 
 
Casella, G. and Berger, R.L. (2002). Statistical inference, 2nd ed. Pacific Grove: Duxbury.  
 
Cochran, W.G. (1977). Sampling Techniques, 3rd ed. New York: Wiley.  
 
Cox, D.R. and Hinkley, D.V. (1974).Theoretical statistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 
Cramér, H. (1956). Sannolikhetskalkylen och några av dess tillämpningar (in Swedish). 3rd ed. 
Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell.  
 
Daston, L. (1988). Classical probability in the Enlightenment. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
 
Fisher, R. (1958). The nature of probability. Centennial review, 2, 261-274. 
 
Fisher, R.A. (1959). Mathematical probability in the natural sciences. Technometrics, 1(1), 21-29. 
 
Foreman, E.K. (1991). Survey sampling principles. New York: Marcel Dekker.  
 
Gillies, D. (2000). Philosophical theories of probability. New York: Routledge. 
 
Lohr, S. (2022). Sampling: Design and Analysis, 3rd ed. Boca Raton: CRC Press.  
 
Marker, D.A. (2008). Methodological Review of "Mortality after the 2003 Invasion of Iraq: A Cross 
Sectional Cluster Sample Survey". Public Opinion Quarterly, 72(2), 345-363. 
   
Neyman, J. (1934). On the Two Different Aspects of the Representative Method: The Method of 
Stratified Sampling and the Method of Purposive Selection. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 
97(4), 558-606. 
 
Neyman, J. (1977). Frequentist Probability and Frequentist Statistics. Synthese, 36(1), 97-131. 
 
Pawitan, Y., Lee, H. and Lee, Y. (2023). Epistemic confidence in the observed confidence interval. 
Scandinavian journal of statistics, 50, 1859-1883. 
Popper, K.R. (1959 ). The Propensity Interpretation of Probability. The British Journal for the 
Philosophy of Science, Vol. 10(37), 25-42. 
 
Salsburg, D. (2001). The lady tasting tea. How statistics revolutionized science in the twentieth 
century. New York: Henry Holt.  
Särndal, C.-E., Swensson, B. and Wretman J. (1992). Model Assisted Survey Sampling. New York: 
Springer-Verlag. 
 
Schweder, T. (2018). Confidence is epistemic probability for empirical science. Journal of Statistical 
Planning and Inference, 195, 116–125. 
 
Sturgis, P., Kuha, J., Baker, N., Callegaro, M., Fisher, S., Green, J., Jennings, W., Lauderdale, B.E. 
and Smith, P. (2018). As assessment of the causes of the errors in the 2015 UK general election 
opinion polls. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A, 181(3), 757–781 

--- Sayfa 11 ---
11 
 
 
Taylor, K. (2018). The prosecutor’s fallacy. Centre of evidence-based medicine. Views. 
https://www.cebm.ox.ac.uk/news/views/the-prosecutors-fallacy. Viewed Feb 9, 2024. 
The Royal Society (2020). The use of statistics in legal proceedings: a primer for the courts. ISBN: 
978-1-78252-486-1. 
Thompson, M.E. (1997). Theory of Sample Surveys. London: Chapman & Hall. 
Vineberg, S. (2012). Dutch Book Arguments, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2022 
Edition), Edward N. Zalta & Uri Nodelman (eds.). 
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2022/entries/dutch-book. Viewed Feb 9, 2024. 
 
Woolridge, J.M. (2013). Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach, 5th ed. Mason: South-
Western.  
