
--- Sayfa 1 ---
 
1 
To be presented at ASME 2020 
PREDICTING NONLINEAR SEISMIC RESPONSE OF STRUCTURAL BRACES USING 
MACHINE LEARNING 
 
(TO BE PRESENTED IMECE2020-24014) 
 
Elif Ecem Bas1, Denis Aslangil2, Mohamed Aly Moustafa1 
 
1 Department of Civil Engineering, University of Nevada – Reno, Reno NV  89557 
2Computational Physics and Methods, CCS-2, Los Alamos National Laboratory – Los Alamos, NM 87545 
 
ABSTRACT 
Numerical modeling of different structural materials that 
have highly nonlinear behaviors has always been a challenging 
problem in engineering disciplines. Experimental data is 
commonly used to characterize this behavior. This study aims to 
improve the modeling capabilities by using state of the art 
Machine Learning techniques, and attempts to answer several 
scientific questions: (i) Which ML algorithm is capable and is 
more efficient to learn such a complex and nonlinear problem? 
(ii) Is it possible to artificially reproduce structural brace 
seismic behavior that can represent real physics? (iii) How can 
our findings be extended to the different engineering problems 
that are driven by similar nonlinear dynamics? To answer these 
questions, the presented methods are validated by using 
experimental brace data. The paper shows that after proper data 
preparation, the long-short term memory (LSTM) method is 
highly capable of capturing the nonlinear behavior of braces. 
Additionally, the effects of tuning the hyperparameters on the 
models, such as layer numbers, neuron numbers, and the 
activation functions, are presented. Finally, the ability to learn 
nonlinear dynamics by using deep neural network algorithms 
and their advantages are briefly discussed. 
Keywords: Structural brace response behavior, nonlinear 
behavior modeling, Machine learning, LSTM 
NOMENCLATURE 
DNN 
Deep neural network 
HS  
Hybrid simulation 
LSTM 
Long-short term memory 
ML  
Machine learning 
NRMSE 
Normalized root mean square error 
PIML 
Physics informed machine learning 
RNN 
Recurrent neural network 
RTHS  
Real-time hybrid simulation 
STS 
Structural Test System 
 
1 Contact author: basel@nevada.unr.edu 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Braces are widely used in structural systems to provide 
lateral load resistance. Thus, the structural response of the 
concentrically braced frames under extreme events (such as 
earthquakes, winds, blasts) strongly depends on its brace 
behavior [1]. In scientific literature, a significant amount of 
studies has investigated the brace behavior both numerically and 
experimentally [1-5]. However, due to the highly nonlinear and 
non-uniform characteristics of the braces, which also depends on 
the loading histories, it is still an open question on how to model 
their dynamic behaviors accurately [6,7]. A robust model has to 
capture bucking, deterioration, and failure due to low-cycle 
fatigue. These effects strongly depend on the nonlinear behavior 
of the braces, which is still not well understood in some cases, 
e.g. under longer duration earthquakes, and thus difficult to 
numerically model [6]. 
Recently, there have been efforts to improve the numerical 
model capabilities by benefiting from the high-fidelity 
experimental data. To this end, machine learning (ML) provides 
new opportunities for scientists to answer long-standing 
questions and serves promising solutions in many dynamic 
engineering problems [8-9]. It is a developing field in structural 
engineering where a wide range of applications are considered, 
such as predicting the global structural response under dynamic 
excitations [10]. In this study, we aim to further improve the 
analytical models by using the advantages of physics-informed 
ML. For this purpose, small-scale brace responses, which are 
tested under increasing scale cyclic loading, is used as the 
training dataset. As a deep neural network algorithm, deep long-
short term memory (LSTM) networks that could predict the 
time-series data sequences are used to predict the dynamic 
responses of the braces. Several models are generated by 
changing the neuron and number of layers as well as time steps 
(lookback) to tune the hyperparameters and make accurate 
predictions. 
In this study, we propose an approach where we predict the 
nonlinear behavior of the structural braces using a data-driven 

--- Sayfa 2 ---
 
2 
To be presented at ASME 2020 
model. The aim is to be able to model the nonlinear response 
behavior by using ML algorithms. The training dataset of the ML 
algorithm is an experimental dataset which is obtained from 
cyclic loading tests and explained in detail. LSTM networks are 
selected to be used as an ML algorithm. It is shown that the 
LSTM models exhibit a great potential to model the nonlinear 
material behavior due to having sequence to sequence input-
output relationship capabilities. Moreover, this modeling 
assumption has great potential to significantly decrease the 
number of necessary experiments for characterizing braces with 
different materials. 
The structure of this paper is as follows: Section 2 describes 
the experimental setup and methods. Section 3 presents the 
results, and Section 4 summarizes our main findings. 
 
2. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND TRAINING DATASET 
 
2.1 Experimental setup  
 
In this study, a small-scale load frame that is part of a 
recently developed hybrid simulation (HS) setup, but could still 
be used independently, at the University of Nevada, Reno, is 
used for obtaining the experimental dataset (see Figure 1). 
 
 
 
FIGURE 1: The representative scheme of the 
experimental setup. 
This load frame is mainly used as an experimental setup for 
the hybrid simulation system; however, it can be controlled 
individually to do material testing. Here, we only introduce the 
parts that are used for material testing (see Figure 1). However, 
the reader is referred to Bas et al. [6] for more details about HS 
system capabilities and its validation. 
 
The load frame has a dynamic actuator where the maximum 
load capacity is 31.14 kN (7 kips) and has ±25.4 mm (±1 in) 
stroke. The actuator can achieve the peak velocity of 338.84 
mm/sec (13.34 in/sec) at no load. In addition, the system is 
supported with an isolated hydraulic power supply system which 
provides an 8.71 l/min (2.3 gpm) pumping capacity and the 
reservoir capacity of oil volume is 56.78 lt (15 gallons). MTS 
Structural Test System (STS) 493 Hardware Controller manages 
the motion of the actuator where the Servo Controller Program 
is used to access and modify the control properties through the 
Servo Controller Program. 
 
2.2 Specimens and Loading Protocol 
 
In structural systems, braced frames are widely used, 
especially in seismically active areas to provide lateral load 
resisting systems. Usually, the brace members are made of 
structural steel and ideally buckle under axial compression 
loading and yield under axial tension loading [6]. Table 1 
presents the material properties of the two different dog-bone 
specimens with different material properties where Specimen A 
and Specimen B are steel and aluminum, respectively. These 
specimens are used to generate two distinct experimental 
datasets. Both specimens are tested under increasing scale cyclic 
loading until failure to capture buckling, deterioration, and 
failure due to low-cycle fatigue induced rupture. 
 
Properties 
Specimen 
A 
Specimen 
B 
Specimen dimensions 
[mm] 
Section cross 
section  
[mm x mm] 
6.35x6.35 
6.35x12.7 
Yield 
Strength[MPa] 
413 
145 
Fabrication 
Cold 
Worked 
Cold 
Worked 
Temper 
Rating 
Hardened 
H14 (1/2 
Hard) 
Hardness 
Rockwell 
80 
(Medium) 
Brinnel 
40 (Soft) 
TABLE 1: Properties of Specimen A (steel) and 
Specimen B (aluminum). 
 
The Modified SAC loading protocol that is adopted from 
Lumpkin [5] is used as the loading for the experiments. 
Displacement controlled cyclic loads are applied until the brace 
failure. Table 2 and Figure 2 present the adopted loading protocol 
where loading amplitudes are expressed in terms of yielding 
displacement of the tested brace. 
 

--- Sayfa 3 ---
 
3 
To be presented at ASME 2020 
Peak 
±0.5Δy 
 
±0.75Δy 
±1Δy 
±1.5Δy 
±2Δy 
±3Δy 
Cycle 
1,2 
 
3,4 
5,6 
7,8 
9,10 
11,12 
 
Peak 
±4Δy 
±5Δy 
±6Δy 
±7Δy 
±8Δy 
±9Δy 
±10Δy 
Cycle 
13,14 
15,16 
17,18 
19,20 
21,22 
23,24 
25,26 
TABLE 2: Loading Protocol for the cyclic test. 
 
 
FIGURE 2: Cyclic-Loading Protocol 
 
2.3 Experimental Results 
 
Two experiments are conducted applying the previously 
defined displacement protocols to the two different specimens. 
Figures 3(a) and 4(a) show the applied displacement time 
histories and as it is seen the displacement magnitude is 
increasing in time and they include both tension and compression 
displacements. The generated response in terms of the force 
(kips) of the two braces to the displacement profiles can be seen 
in figures 3b and 4b. It is clear from the figures that the behavior 
of the braces is highly nonlinear as, initially, there is a positive 
correlation between the applied displacement and the force 
where the force is increasing upon an increase in the 
displacement. However, later, the larger displacements start to 
generate smaller forces so the correlation between the 
displacement and force becomes negative. Capturing this 
nonlinear behavior is a great challenge for the numerical 
methods, and it requires the reforming of significantly large 
amounts of long experiments for each different specimen. In 
addition, Figures 3(c) and 4(c) present the brace hysteresis where 
the braces experience buckling and low-cycle fatigue induced 
rupture which is hard to model accurately with the current finite 
element modeling techniques. Since the overall structural 
behaviors of braced frames are highly dependent on the 
hysteretic response of the braces, it is very important to model 
this behavior numerically. The presented experimental datasets 
are used for training and testing the ML algorithms that are 
discussed in detail in the next section. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
FIGURE 3: Specimen A: (a) Displacement time 
history, (b) Force time history, (c) Brace hysteresis 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 4: Specimen B: (a) Displacement time 
history, (b) Force time history, (c) Brace hysteresis. 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 

--- Sayfa 4 ---
 
4 
To be presented at ASME 2020 
3. LSTM NETWORK FOR MODELING 
 
Recurrent neural networks (RNN) are widely used in 
forecasting the time series. The great advantage of the RNN 
algorithms is the backward connection points, which allows the 
layers to receive both inputs as well as their own outputs from 
the previous time step. However, the method itself comes with 
two main disadvantages: (i) having unstable gradients and (ii) 
utilizing a very limited short-term memory. In order to tackle 
these problems, LSTM cells are recommended as they perform 
better, converge rapidly, and detect the long-time dependencies 
in the data [12].  
 
The LSTM networks are trained with multiple datasets, and 
as in other time series prediction models, the input sequences are 
formatted in three-dimensional arrays. The first dimension is the 
batch size, which consists of independent datasets; the second 
dimension is the time steps that can also be defined as lookback, 
and the third dimension is the size of the input dimension. 
Dimensionality is equal to unity for the problems where the input 
has only one variable and can be larger than one for the 
multivariate time series. Lookback parameter is one of the key 
parameters that makes LSTMs more reliable since it allows the 
algorithm to use “lookback” in the past time steps. Hence, it 
extends the used information that leads to better predictions for 
the next time steps, although it slightly increases the memory 
requirements. 
 
The LSTM cells include mainly two vectors, namely h(t) and 
c(t), where h(t) represents the short-term state and c(t) represents 
the long-term state. For each time step, the current input vector 
x(t) and the previous time step input h(t-1) are fed into four fully 
connected layers which all serve different purposes. The g(t) 
state’s role is to analyze the current inputs and the previous short-
term state, and this state’s most important parts of being stored 
in the long-term state, c(t), where the rest is dropped. The other 
three layers are the gate controllers. f(t) is the forget gates which 
control the erased parts of the long-term state. Input gate i(t) 
decides which parts of the g(t) state should proceed in the long-
term state. And the output state o(t) is where the decision of long-
term state parts should be the output of the current time step for 
both short term state h(t) and the output state. The LSTM 
computations are given in Equation (1), and a typical LSTM cell 
is shown in Figure 5. In the equations, Wxs are the weight 
matrices of each layer for their connection to the input vector x(t), 
where the Whs are the weight matrices of each layer for their 
connection to the previous short-term state. Bias terms are 
represented with 𝒃s in each layer [11]. 
 
𝒊(𝑡) = 𝜎(𝑾𝑥𝑖
𝑇𝒙(𝑡) + 𝑾ℎ𝑖
𝑇𝒉(𝑡−1) + 𝒃𝑖) 
(1) 
𝒇(𝑡) = 𝜎(𝑾𝑥𝑓
𝑇𝒙(𝑡) + 𝑾ℎ𝑓
𝑇𝒉(𝑡−1) + 𝒃𝑓) 
𝒐(𝑡) = 𝜎(𝑾𝑥𝑜
𝑇𝒙(𝑡) + 𝑾ℎ𝑜
𝑇𝒉(𝑡−1) + 𝒃𝑜) 
𝒈(𝑡) = 𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ(𝑾𝑥𝑔
𝑇𝒙(𝑡) + 𝑾ℎ𝑔
𝑇𝒉(𝑡−1) + 𝒃𝑔) 
𝒄(𝑡) = 𝒇(𝑡) ⊗𝒄(𝑡−1) + 𝒊(𝑡) ⊗𝒈(𝑡) 
𝒚(𝑡) = 𝒉(𝑡) = 𝒐(𝑡) ⊗𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ(𝒄(𝑡)) 
 
As explained above, an LSTM cell can observe the 
importance of the input, can remember the longer history of the 
time series storing in the long-term state, and can store longer 
information as long as it is needed and remove the information 
whenever it is unnecessary. The advantages of the LSTM make 
it suitable to capture the long-term patterns in time series even if 
the problem is highly nonlinear [12]. As a result, in this paper, 
deep LSTM networks are used for multiple hidden layers that 
include LSTM layers and fully connected layers. The 
hyperparameters that are tuned here are neuron networks, hidden 
layers, and lookback numbers and they are discussed next. 
 
 
 
FIGURE 5: Typical LSTM cell 
 
 
3.1 Methodology for LSTM 
 
Several LSTM models are prepared to tune the 
hyperparameters of the network in order to obtain a proper model 
to predict the nonlinear brace responses. As mentioned earlier, 
the dataset to train the model is obtained from the brace 
experiments. The displacement time histories are used as input 
where the output is the force of the brace which is the prediction 
of the model. 
 
Table 3 shows the hyperparameters of the LSTM models 
that are used for both materials of this study. Mainly three models 
are developed and named with respect to their neuron numbers, 
where Model 1 has 5, Model 2 has 20, and Model 3 has 40 
neurons. For Model 1 and Model 2, the hidden layers are set to 
be 5 where the lookback parameter is 30 for both models. Five 
different versions of Model 3 are generated by changing the 
hidden layers in the range of 5 to 20, where lookback parameters 
are also changed from 10 to 40. For both materials, 50% of the 
experimental data is used as the training dataset, while the rest is 
used as the test dataset. The model performances are evaluated 
by calculating the normalized root mean square errors 
(NRMSE). 

--- Sayfa 5 ---
 
5 
To be presented at ASME 2020 
 
Neuron # 
Hidden layer # 
Lookback 
Model 1 
5 
5 
30 
Model 2 
20 
5 
30 
Model 3a 
40 
5 
30 
Model 3b 
40 
10 
30 
Model 3c 
40 
20 
30 
Model 3d 
40 
5 
10 
Model 3e 
40 
5 
40 
 
TABLE 3: LSTM hyperparameters. 
 
3.3 Comparison of the experimental and predicted 
results 
 
As mentioned above, the overall experimental data is 
divided into two halves, where the first half represents the 
training dataset and the other half is the test dataset. The input of 
the deep LSTM network is designed to be the brace displacement 
which predicts the brace axial force as the output of the ML 
model. Here, only the results from Model 3a are shown, which 
gives the most accurate results. The NRMSE values for both 
material modeling predictions are calculated as 18% and 14% for 
Specimen A and Specimen B, respectively.  
 
The comparison between the true force values and the 
predicted force values are shown in Figure 5 and Figure 6 for 
Specimen A and B, respectively. As can be seen from the figures, 
the strength degradation can be predicted successfully by the 
deep LSTM model, even with the limited portion of the data used 
in training.  In other words, although the LSTM algorithm is 
trained by the portion where there is a positive correlation 
between the displacement and force, the algorithm is able to 
capture the negative correlation between these two metrics. 
 
 
FIGURE 5: Force time history comparison for 
Specimen A 
 
 
FIGURE 6: Force time history comparison for 
Specimen B 
 
 
4. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
 
In this study, experimental cyclic loading results of the steel 
and aluminum small-scale braces, which were obtained from the 
experimental setup at the University of Nevada, Reno, are used 
to explore the suitability of ML techniques on modeling 
nonlinear behaviors. The key findings can be summarized as: 
- 
Deep LSTM networks can be used to forecast the 
nonlinear seismic brace behavior due to their success in 
capturing time-series using long- and short-term 
memories. 
- 
Similar hyperparameter values are found to be optimal 
for modeling two different materials with an LSTM 
technique. 
- 
By proper data preparation, the LSTM models are able 
to capture the nonlinear behavior of the materials. 
However, increasing the number of training data, i.e. 
using more experimental data, different loading 
protocols, etc., beyond what has been used herein is 
needed to further improve the prediction accuracy of the 
model. 
 
For future directions, it would be interesting to run new 
experiments and to compare LSTM predictions with different 
loading protocols such as for earthquakes, wind, and so on [6]. 
The found capability of the LSTM technique to capture nonlinear 
behaviors is promising to extend its applicability to the different 
nonlinear problems from other engineering areas, such as for 
turbulent 
mixing 
problems 
occuring 
in 
atmospheric, 
oceanographic, and astrophysical flows [13, 14]. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Uriz, Patxi and Mahin, Stephen A. “Toward Earthquake-
Resistant Design of Concentrically Braced Steel-Frame 
Structures.” PEER 2008/08, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA. 2008. 
[2] Hsiao, Po-Chien “Seismic Performance Evaluation of 
Concentrically Braced Frames.” PhD Thesis, University of 
California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA. 2012. DOI:10.1094/PDIS-
11-11-0999-PDN 
[3] Tsai, Ching-Yi, Tsai, Keh-Chyuan, Lin, Pao-Chun, Ao, 
Wai-Hang, Roeder, Charles W., Mahin, Stephen A., Lin, Chih-
Han, Yu, Yi-Jer, Wang, Kung-Juin, Wu, An-Chien, Chen Jia-
Chian and Lin, Te-Hung. “Seismic Design and Hybrid Tests of a 
Full-Scale Three-Story Concentrically Braced Frame using In-
Plane Buckling Braces.” Earthquake Spectra Vol. 29 No. 3 
(2020): pp. 1043–67. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1193/1.4000165 
[4] Yang, Tony, Stojadinovic, Bozidar and Moehle, Jack. 
“Hybrid Simulation of a Zipper-Braced Steel Frame under 
Earthquake Excitation.” Earthquake Engineering & Structural 
Dynamics Vol. 38 No. 1 (2008): pp. 95–113. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1002/eqe.848 
[5] Lumpkin, Eric J. “Enhanced Seismic Performance of 
Multi-Story Special Concentrically Braced Frames using a 

--- Sayfa 6 ---
 
6 
To be presented at ASME 2020 
Balanced Design Procedure.” MSc Thesis, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA. 2009. 
[6] Bas, Elif Ecem, Moustafa, Mohamed Aly and Pekcan, 
Gokhan. “Compact Hybrid Simulation System for Research and 
Education: System Validation and New Applications for Braced 
Frames Seismic Testing.” Journal of Earthquake Engineering 
(2020): DOI: 10.1080/13632469.2020.1733138 
[7] Hammad, Ali and Moustafa, Mohamed Aly. “Shake 
Table tests of special concentric braced frames under short and 
long duration earthquakes.” Engineering Structures Vol. 200 
(2019): DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engstruct.2019.109695. 
[8] Kirchdoerfer, Trenton T. and Ortiz, Micheal. “Data 
Driven Computing with Noisy Material Data Sets.” Computer 
Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering Vol. 326 
(2017): 
pp. 
622-641. 
DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2017.07.039 
[9] Kirchdoerfer, Trenton T. and Ortiz, Micheal. “Data-
Driven Computing in Dynamics”, International Journal for 
Numerical Methods in Engineering Vol. 113 No. 11(2017): pp. 
1697-1710. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/nme.5716. 
[10] Bas, Elif Ecem, Moustafa, Mohamed Aly, Feil-Seifer, 
David and Blankenburg, Janelle. “Using a Machine Learning 
Approach for Computational Substructure in Real-Time Hybrid 
Simulation”, IMAC XXXVIII, Houston TX, February 10-13, 
2020. 
 [11] Géron, Aurélien. “Hands-on Machine Learning with 
Scikit-Learn, Keras and Tensorflow, 2nd Edition.” O’Reilly 
Media,Inc, (2019). 
[12] Zhang, Ruiyang, Chen, Zhao, Chen, Su, Zheng, 
Jingwei, Buyukozturk, Oral and Sun, Hao. “Deep Long Short-
Term Memory Networks for Nonlinear Structural Seismic 
Response Prediction”, Computers & Structures Vol. 220 (2019): 
pp. 
55-68. 
DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compstruc.2019.05.006 
[13] Aslangil, Denis, Livescu, Daniel and Banerjee, 
Arindam. “Variable-Density Buoyancy-Driven Turbulence with 
Asymmetric Initial Density Distribution.” Physica D: Nonlinear 
Phenomena 
Vol. 
406 
(2020): 
pp. 
132444. 
DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physd.2020.132444 
[14] Aslangil, Denis, Livescu, Daniel and Banerjee, 
Arindam. “Effects of Atwood and Reynolds numbers on 
buoyancy-driven homogeneous variable-density turbulence.” 
Journal of Fluid Mechanics Vol. 895 (2020): A12. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.268 
 
