
--- Sayfa 1 ---
 
1 
 
 
 
An Earthquake Can Be Predicted 
 
Manana Kachakhidze*1, Nino Kachakhidze-Murphy1 
 
1Georgian Technical University, Natural Hazard Scientific‐Research Center  
0171, Georgia, Tbilisi, Kostava str. 77 
*Corresponding author: Manana Kachakhidze kachakhidzem@gmail.com 
 
 Abstract 
 
       The present consolidated paper represents the VLF/LF electromagnetic radiation as the 
earthquake's true precursor. The search mainly is carried out on the basis of a theoretical model of the 
generation of electromagnetic emissions during the earthquake preparation period and earthquake 
prediction methodology. It is shown that this parameter is capable of describing the fault formative 
process in the focal area.  Besides, VLF/LF electromagnetic radiation frequency analysis gives the 
possibility simultaneously to determine all three characteristic parameters necessary for incoming 
earthquake prediction (magnitude, epicenter, and time of occurring).  
       It is shown that the prediction of moderate and strong earthquakes is possible with great precision. 
 
Introduction 
 
       Earthquake-stricken humanity constantly has a question: cannot earthquakes be predicted?  
       Professor Max Wyss  has answered this question with hope: I doubt that human curiosity and 
ingenuity can be prevented in the long run from exploring fully the extent to which at least some 
earthquakes are predictable, although it is not easy (20). 
      We agree with Professor Max Wyss that earthquake predictability is not easy, but we already 
emphasize that earthquakes are predictable. 
       In this article, we want to briefly introduce the readers to the novelties achieved in the last decades 
in the field of earthquake research, which leads to earthquake prediction.   
       Studies that appeared in the scientific literature since the end of the last century confirm that 
geophysical phenomena,  which may accompany the earthquake preparation process and expose 
themselves several months, weeks, or days prior to earthquakes, take place in the seismogenic area. 
They are VLF/LF electromagnetic emissions,  changing of the intensity of the electro telluric current in 
the focal area, perturbations of the geomagnetic field in forms of irregular pulsations or regular short-
period pulsations, perturbations of the atmospheric electric field, irregular changing of characteristic 
parameters of the lower ionosphere (plasma frequency, the height of D layer, etc.), irregular 
perturbations reaching the upper ionosphere (namely F2-layer, for 2-3 days before the earthquake), 
increased intensity of electromagnetic emissions in the upper ionosphere in several hours or tenths of 
minutes before the earthquake, lighting before the earthquake, infrared radiation, total electron content 
(TEC) anomalies, and etс. It is obvious that all the above-mentioned phenomena are not observed before 
every earthquake and do not have a place in the noted sequence. 
       These facts confirm that these anomalous perturbations are related to the earthquake preparation 
process, so it is not excluded that any of these fields may be an earthquake true precursor. 
       An earthquake is a geological phenomenon. A well-known avalanche-unstable geological model 
of fault formation describes (15)  the origination of different size cracks and finally, the main fault 
length formation process in the focal area of an incoming earthquake.  The sizes of cracks available for 
failure in earthquakes are fractally distributed (20). 
       If the geophysical field is a true precursor, it must accurately describe the geological model 
mentioned above, and in this regard, must analytically explain the complex process of fault formation 
from the beginning of the appearance of microcracks to the final formation of the main fault and the 
restoration of equilibrium in the medium, not only qualitatively, but quantitatively too. 

--- Sayfa 2 ---
 
2 
 
       Should be noted that discussing the earthquake problem, the scientist has no right to solve the task 
by allowing certain boundary conditions because it will not give us a real result, especially the 
possibility of predicting an earthquake. 
       Let's say in advance that we were able to find the field being an earthquake's true precursor. It is 
the VLF/LF electromagnetic emissions detected prior to earthquakes.  
       This opportunity has been given to us by the research results conducted by the world-famous 
scientists, whose works have been going on since the end of the last century up today. On the one hand, 
according to these works: 
- 
1) EM emissions appear approximately several weeks before the earthquake.  2) The spectrum 
of electromagnetic radiation is characterized by the following sequence: MHz, kHz. 3) These 
emissions are accompanied by ULF radiation. 4) VLF/LF electromagnetic emissions before the 
earthquake become very weak or completely disappear (so-called "silence” appears).  5) The 
"silence" of VLF/LF EM radiation is followed by an earthquake (1, 2,3, 6,7,8,9,10,16,17). 
 
- 
On the other hand, for detecting EM radiation that existed prior to the earthquake, the relevant 
radio networks were established by Japanese researchers in the 2000s (Japanese‐Pacific 
VLF/LF Network) and a European network (INFREP) (3) by Japanese, Russian, and Italian 
teams' cooperation. It is worth underling that there are examples of strong earthquakes when 
no radiation has been detected (4). 
               In 2010 an article was published (16) where the evolution of   
            EM emissions under real conditions have been shown in the case of the L'Aquila  
            earthquake. 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Evolution of EM emissions in case of L’Aquila earthquake 
 
       This picture combines the studies pointed out above during the current process in the pre-earthquake 
period (27.03.2009-6.04.2009). It confirms the existence of EM radiation before an earthquake and its 
frequency changing with some regularity (1,2,3,6,7,8,9,10,16,17).            
       However, the possibility to predict an earthquake was not seen.  
       Hence the necessity for studying the immediate cause of the generation of EM emissions detected 
prior to earthquakes became the primary issue for us. 
 
Discussion    
 
       Since the sizes of cracks are fractally distributed, during the studies, we had to take into account 
that the seismogenic area is an oscillatory-distributed system. 
       A seismogenic zone can be considered to be distributed system because the mass, elasticity (of the 
mechanical system), capacity, and inductance (of the electric system) are roughly uniformly spread 
throughout the entire in the whole volume of the system.  

--- Sayfa 3 ---
 
3 
 
       Obviously, the mass and elasticity characteristic of the mechanical system changes in the 
earthquake preparation area, but the corresponding mechanical field reflecting these processes on the 
Earth's surface is not observed during the earthquake preparation process. 
       Therefore, we must consider the earthquake preparation zone as an electrically distributed system, 
where each small element has its own capacitance and inductance. In addition, as mentioned above, the 
changes in the frequency of electromagnetic radiation in the process of earthquake preparation are 
characterized by a certain regularity.         
        If it turns out that these changes have been caused by changes in each of the small element's own 
capacity and inductance (since these changes mainly take place in the fractals during the main fault 
formation), then obviously electromagnetic radiation could be considered a true precursor. 
       As a result of relevant searching it was created the model (12). 
       In the referred work it is obtained the formula (1), which analytically connects with each other the 
main frequency of the observed electromagnetic emissions and the linear dimension of the emitted 
body: 
𝜔= 𝛽
𝑐
𝑙        (1) 
where β is the characteristic coefficient of geological medium (it approximately equals 1).         
       The question is what is the emitted body.  
       As known, the principal process taking place in the focal area during the earthquake preparation 
period is the main fault formative process which is accompanied by EM emissions 
(1,2,3,6,7,8,9,10,16,17) By the model (12), the same medium during the earthquake preparation period 
is considered an oscillation system, and it is obtained the formula (1) of the self-generated frequency. 
Therefore, it is clear that the  emitted body is the main fault and its length is 𝑙. 
       According to the formula (1) of determination of fault length by the observed frequency,  it is 
possible in advance, before the earthquake, to calculate one of the important characteristic of an 
incoming earthquake, magnitude, by formulas of dependence of magnitude on the fault length.  
       For example, in the case of the L'Aquila earthquake, the frequency of electromagnetic radiation 
equal to about 20 kHz was fixed (18).  According to the formula (1) 𝑙≈15 km. By the formula (2) (19) 
lg l=0.6Ms−2.5 (2) 
M = 6.1 
If we compare the obtained result with the real data (5), where  𝑙≈ 16   we can say for sure that 
according to the formula (1), obtained 𝑙    is the length of the backbone fault of the earthquake and, 
therefore, the emitted body really is the main fault. 
       This means that a changing of the geophysical field characteristic parameter (VLF/LF EM 
emissions frequency) is inevitably related to changes in the fault length in the focus, which allows us 
not only qualitatively but also quantitatively to evaluate the complete picture of an earthquake 
preparation from the appearance of microcracks in the focal area, up to the formation of the main fault 
and to a final equilibrium state. Hence the pre-earthquake VLF / LF electromagnetic radiation turned 
out to be a true precursor. 
       On the other hand, let's remind of the classical geological model - an avalanche-like unstable model 
of fault formation in the focal area. 
       It is logical to assume that:  If VLF / LF electromagnetic radiation is a true precursor, it must be an 
exact manifestation of the mechanical stages of the avalanche-unstable geological model.         
       Let's check this issue as well: 
       It is known that the avalanche-like unstable model of fault formation is divided into four main 
stages: In the first stage, which can go on for several months throughout the whole seismogenic area, 
the chaotic formation of micro-cracks without any orientation takes place (15). This stage of formation 
of micro-cracks is the reversible process - at this stage not only micro-cracks can be formed but also 
the so-called “locked” can occur. Cracks created at this stage are small. This stage, according to our 
model (formula 1) in the electromagnetic emissions frequency range, should be expressed by the 
discontinuous spectrum of electromagnetic radiation in MHz diapason (12), which is proved by the 
latest special scientific works (6,7,10,16).  
       The second stage of the avalanche-like unstable model of fault formation is an irreversible 
avalanche process of already somewhat oriented microstructures, which is accompanied by the 
inclusion of the earlier “locked” sections. 

--- Sayfa 4 ---
 
4 
 
       Based on our model (12), we have to suppose that this stage in the emissions frequency spectrum 
should be already expressed by MHz continuous spectrum. Although, because the lengths of the cracks 
start to increase at the expense of aggregation of primary small cracks, the values of electromagnetic 
emissions frequency must gradually decrease. 
       According to the avalanche-like unstable model, this process takes place a few days before the main 
shock (7,16). The transition of the MHz emissions in kHz in the frequency spectrum of electromagnetic 
radiation, according to formula (1), corresponds to the very stage when the crack length already reaches 
about a kilometer (7,12,,13,16,18).   
        In the third stage of the avalanche-like unstable model of fault formation, the relatively big size faults 
unite into one - the main fault. This process should correspond to the gradual fall of frequencies in kHz (12), 
which according to formula (1) refers to the increase of fault length in the focal area. By (2) formula, it also 
refers to the increase of magnitudes of the expected earthquake (19). 
       Of course, an association of cracks into one fault, which at the final stage of earthquake preparation 
proceeds intensely, will use a definite part of energy accumulated in the focal area and therefore, will 
result in its decrease (11).  
       In such a situation, a period settles before an earthquake (which can last from several hours to even 
some days), when a fault is already formed, while an earthquake has not occurred yet, since accumulated 
tectonic stress is not yet sufficient to overcome the limitation of the solidity of the geological 
environment. 
       The system, which is waiting for a further “portion” of tectonic stress, is in the so-called “stupor -
waiting” condition, in the principle, the process of main fault formation is not going on in it anymore, 
and respectively, electromagnetic emissions would not take place. This is proved by experiments too 
(9,10,16). 
       This process is expressed correspondingly in the electromagnetic emissions spectrum: some hours 
before the earthquake (up to 2 days) in the spectrum the emissions interruption or “electromagnetic 
emissions silence” is observed (16). Of course, we should expect the renewal of electromagnetic 
emissions exactly before the earthquake (the fourth stage of the fault formation process). 
       In the period of electromagnetic emissions monitoring the moment of emissions spectrum 
interruption is urgent for determining of time of occurrence of an incoming earthquake (the second 
characteristic parameter of the incoming earthquake), since at the final stage of earthquake preparation, 
as it is mentioned above, a very short time is needed to fill in the critical reserve of tectonic stress for 
main fault realization.  
       Thus, good conformity and synthesis of our model and avalanche-like unstable model of fault 
formation are evident and rather harmonious. 
       VLF/LF EM radiation is useful for the determination of the epicenter (the third characteristic 
parameter of the incoming earthquake). From the points selected around the receiver, where VLF/LF 
EM emissions are fixed, by the Direction-finding method, it is possible to define the incoming 
earthquake epicenter. 
       Today, in the scientific literature dealing with the study of the problem of earthquakes, in relation 
to one or another geophysical field that changes anomalously during the period of earthquake 
preparation, the term "precursor" is used. Corresponding theories have also been created, but the 
possibilities of predicting earthquakes are not yet seen. 
       The question naturally arises: what advantage does VLF/LF electromagnetic radiation have in 
regards to earthquake prediction?  
       In the results of studying, we may underline the advantage of VLF/LF electromagnetic radiation: 
VLF/LF EM emissions turned out to be the unique precursor because it gives the promising possibility 
of simultaneous determination of moderate and strong, inland incoming earthquake magnitude, 
epicenter, and time of occurrence. The revealed precursor is the first and only precursor, which 
describes the fault formation process in the incoming earthquake focus. Besides, it numerically 
calculates fault length (magnitude) at any moment of monitoring. 
       It is worth underlying that no reliable criterion is in seismology yet, can distinguish the strong 
foreshocks from the mainshock. This issue can be resolved with rather a high accuracy on the basis of 
a theoretical model (12): if after any shock electromagnetic emissions still continue to exist and the 
frequency data still tend to decrease, it means that the process of fault formation in the earthquake focus 

--- Sayfa 5 ---
 
5 
 
is not completed yet and we have to wait for the mainshock. It is on the contrary in the case of 
aftershocks. This proves once again that VLF/LF electromagnetic radiation is the true precursor.   
       In the next step, our interest was to “see” main fault formation and EM radiation so-called “silence” 
signs in EM radiation retrospective records of a real earthquake. Besides, we wanted to try to determine 
the magnitude i.e. our aim was to check our theoretical searching with real continuous data. In other 
words, we would like to "predict" an already occurred earthquake. 
       In order to accomplish this task, we worked out retrospective data of INFREP (European Network 
of Electromagnetic Radiation) for the Crete earthquake with M= 5.6 (25/05 / 2016, 08:36:13 UTC). 
Studies have been conducted with continuous data for 73 days (Kachakhidze, et.al, 2019) (14). 
       INFREP network fixes every minute amplitudes of 10 different baseline frequencies of VLF/LF 
electromagnetic radiation in diapason 20 270 Hz - 270 000 Hz.  
       It is clear that, if any frequency channel actually reflects the earthquake preparation, the avalanche-
like unstable geological process should be reflected in the frequency data (formula 1).  
       For this reason, we calculated the lengths of cracks in every minute corresponding to all frequency 
channels towards the lengths relevant to the channel's baseline frequencies (in the percentage).   It was 
found out two active channels (37 500 Hz) and (45 900 Hz) as the average daily value of the cracks 
lengths was the maximum for them. This means that from discussed 10 channels, only two, with the 
above-mentioned frequencies, described the earthquake preparation process. In this case, according to 
the above given formula (1), the magnitude of the incoming earthquake should be between 5.5 and 5.7 
(Crete earthquake magnitude is really estimated as M= 5.6).  
       Besides, we found out that date diurnal periodic variations of electromagnetic emissions are clearly 
expressed on all channels, except the (37 500 Hz) channel. We have such variations in the (37 500 Hz) 
channel recordings too, but till some period, namely up to 02.05.2016, after which the anomalous 
process starts, indicating that the avalanche–unstable process of fault formation has already begun (Fig. 
2). 
 
 
Fig.2. The initial moment of the avalanche-like unstable process of fault 
formation (the red arrow) 
 
       Since, in the case of discussed earthquake, only (37 500 Hz) frequency channel meets both 
conditions: for this channel the average daily value of the lengths of the cracks is maximal and an 
avalanche process of fault formation appears only on  it, obviously, to predict the earthquake, we must 
rely only on the data of this channel. 
       During analyses, has been found, that 19 days before the earthquake, the fault formation avalanche 
process appeared in the (37 500 Hz) frequency channel. By the formulas (1, 2), the expected length of 
the main fault is about 8 000 meters, and the magnitude approximately is equal to 5.6.  
       In order to analysis of the full process of earthquake preparation, we elaborated the daily averaged 
frequencies by using the average square deviation method,  and we calculated 


x
 values  (fig.3). 
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
1
297
593
889
1185
1481
1777
2073
2369
2665
2961
3257
3553
3849
4145
4441
4737
5033
5329
5625
5921
6217
6513
6809
7105
7401
7697
7993
8289
8585
8881
9177
9473
9769
10065
10361
10657
10953
11249

--- Sayfa 6 ---
 
6 
 
 
 
       Fig. 3.  The avalanche process of fault formation and EM emissions “silence”  
period before the considered earthquake (with the red arrow is shown earthquake occurring moment) 
  
       It is important that such elaboration of the data manifests the moment of the onset of EM emission 
“silence” prior to an earthquake. it was equal to about two days in the case of the Crete earthquake.      
       Thus, a real earthquake's retrospective data analysis shows the possibilities to fix the exact moment 
of the beginning of the fault formation avalanche process and EM radiation's "silence" onset moment. 
In other words, in the case of the EM emissions monitoring, we have the possibility to observe the 
whole process of the earthquake preparation and finally, predict the earthquake.   
       It is clear that, when the tectonic stress increases in a certain zone of the region, physical, chemical, 
electromagnetic, mechanical, etc. fields will change in this area, most of which will be observed on the 
earth's surface in the form of abnormal changes. The features of these fields in connection with 
earthquakes are revealed in the fact that they usually, only qualitatively express the processes in the 
focal area. Based on them it is not a possible simultaneous determination of all three parameters 
necessary for incoming earthquake prediction (magnitude, epicenter, and time of occurring). It means, 
that these fields really have only indicative features in the process of earthquake preparation. 
       It is obvious also, that the process of fault formation without fail must be reflected in the abnormal 
changes in the certain geophysical field and this phenomenon should be recorded prior to the 
earthquake. 
       This means that a change in the characteristic parameter of this certain geophysical field will 
inevitably be related to changes in the length of the fault,  which will allow us not only qualitatively but 
also quantitatively to evaluate the complete picture of an earthquake preparation process  from the 
appearance of microcracks in focus, up to the formation of the main fault and to a final equilibrium 
state. 
       The prediction of the incoming earthquake will be possible only by analyzing an anomalous change 
in such a field. 
       Finally, based on current scientific studies, anomalous changes in the fields, observed in the 
seismogenic area during the earthquake formative period, must be divided into three groups: earthquake 
triggering factors, earthquake indicators, and earthquake precursors. These three factors can be defined 
as follows: 
       1. The physical field that exists independently of the earthquake preparation process should be 
considered as an earthquake trigger (natural or man-made) if at the final stage of earthquake preparation 
when tectonic stress reaches the limit of the solidity of the geological medium, it can affect the tectonic 
stress and correct the time of earthquake occurrence  (for example, tides, in some cases changing of 
atmospheric pressure, reciprocal - influences of earthquakes, sharp changes of water level in reservoirs, 
etc.). 
       2. An indicator of earthquakes can be called a physical field, that exists independently of the 
earthquake formative process, but due to the existence of this process, it undergoes abnormal changes 
from a certain period of earthquake preparation. It should be emphasized that the origin of the 

--- Sayfa 7 ---
 
7 
 
earthquake indicator is not caused by the direct process of formation of the main fault length. The 
indicator is caused by perturbations of geophysical fields in seismogenic (mostly focal) areas (e.g. earth 
magnetic field anomalies, changes of atmospheric electric field potential gradient, telluric field 
anomalies, gases emissions from rocks, TEC anomalies and etc.) 
       Mainly, in the earth-atmosphere-ionosphere coupling system, in the case of perturbations, which 
may be caused not only by terrestrial but also by solar reasons, the same geophysical field often 
manifests “indicator” properties in case of the presence of both of these factors (e.g. telluric field 
anomalies are observed both in the process of earthquake preparation and in bad weather, TEC 
anomalies reveal themselves in both strong earthquakes and thunderstorms,  the earth's magnetic field 
anomalies are fixed in both earthquakes and magnetic storms, changings in the electric potential of the 
earth’s surface appear as in the case of bad weather but earthquakes as well, etc.). 
       Therefore, "earthquake indicators" can be called those anomalous changes of geophysical fields, 
which are really caused by the process of earthquake preparation, but they cannot analytically describe 
the process of main fault formation, that is, these fields are not useful to predict the earthquake. 
       3. The earthquake true precursor is the physical field, the cause of which origination is the process 
of the formation of the main fault length in the medium and the anomalous changing of which 
parameters (or parameter) expresses the process of formation of the main fault final length at the 
expense of the arising and coalescence of the cracks due to the accumulation of tectonic stress.  
       That is, by means of precursor, it will be possible quantitatively to monitor changes in the length 
of the main fault from the beginning of the fault formation to the complete ending of the earthquake 
process. 
       We would like to emphasize that the true precursor, VLF/ LF EM radiation,   fully meets the 
Guidelines for Submission of Earthquake Precursor Candidates (21). 
       In case of weak earthquakes, we have to wait for the electromagnetic emissions in high frequency 
diapason but high-frequency waves attenuate rapidly, and observing them on the earth’s surface is 
difficult. 
 
Conclusion: 
 
       In the results of the research the following conclusions are made: 
       1) By the active channel frequency, it is possible to determine the length of the “cracked backbone“ 
on which the process of cracks origination is going on actively and ultimately the main fault forms. 
       2) By the length of the “cracked backbone” it is possible to determine the magnitude of an incoming 
earthquake with certain accuracy about several dozen days before the earthquake. 
       3) After the active frequency channel detection, it is already possible to determine the incoming 
earthquake epicenter with certain accuracy. 
       4) In order to the short-term prediction of a moderate and strong earthquake, it is recommended to 
begin careful monitoring of the frequency data from the beginning of the fault formation avalanche-
unstable process, keep an eye on the process dynamics, and fix the starting moment of "silence" of the 
electromagnetic radiation. 
       In the case of monitoring electromagnetic radiation, it is possible to make a prediction of an 
incoming earthquake from several dozen up to several hours before earthquake occurrence (depending 
on the geological medium).  
       5) It is possible to separate the foreshock (aftershocks too) from the main shock.  
       Thus, VLF/LF EM emissions turned out to be the true precursor, which gives the possibility of 
simultaneous determination of moderate and strong, inland incoming earthquake epicenter, time of 
occurrence, and magnitude with high precision.  
       It is worth underlining that the revealed precursor is the first and only among other precursors, 
which describes the fault formation process in the incoming earthquake focal area and numerically 
calculates fault length (magnitude) at any moment of monitoring.  
       Thus, to the question "is it possible to predict earthquakes?" we may answer that moderate and 
strong earthquakes can be predicted. 
 
Acknowledgments: The authors are grateful to the network INFREP, for providing us with the MHz 
and kHz fractal-electromagnetic emissions data used in this paper. 

--- Sayfa 8 ---
 
8 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
1. Biagi, P.F., Castellana, L., Maggipinto, T., Loiacono, D., Schiavulli, L., Ligonzo, T., 
            Fiore,M.,Suciu, E., Ermini (2009) A pre seismic radio anomaly revealed in the area  
            where the Abruzzo earthquake (M=6.3) occurred on 6 April 2009. Nat Hazards Earth  
            Syst Sci 9:1551–1556. doi.org/10.5194/nhess-9-1551-2009 
 
2. Biagi Pier Francesco, Righetti Flavia, Maggipinto Tommaso, Schiavulli Luigi, 
LigonzoTeresa, Ermini Anita, Moldovan Iren Adelina, Moldovan Adrian Septimiu, Silva 
Hugo, Gonçalves Bezzeghoud Mourad, Contadakis Michael E, Arabelos Dimitrios N, Xenos 
Thomas D, Buyuksarac Aydin  (2012) Anomalies observed in VLF and LF radio signals onthe 
occasion of the western Turkey earthquake (Mw 5.7) on May 19, 2011. Int J Geosci 03:856–
8 65. doi.org/10.4236/ijg.2012.324086 
 
3. Biagi, P.F., Magippinto, T., Schiavulli, L., Ligonzo, T., Ermini, A.: European Network for 
collecting VLF/LF radio signals (D5.1a). DPC- INGV - S3 Project.  “Short Term Earthquake 
prediction and preparation”, 2013. 
 
4. Biagi, P.F, Colella, R., Schiavulli, L., Ermini, A., Boudjada, M., Eichelberger, H.,  
            Schwingenschuh, K., Katzis, K., Contadakis, M. E., Skeberis, C., Moldovan, I.A.,  
            Bezzeghoud, M. The INFREP Network: Present situation and recent results. Open J     
            Earthq.Res 8:101–115 (2019).  
 
5. Cirella, A., A. Piatanesi, E. Tinti, M. Chini and M. Cocco. Complexity of the rupture process 
during the 2009 L’Aquila, Italy, earthquake. Geophys. J. Int. (2012) 190, 607–621, doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-246X.2012.05505.x 
 
6. Eftaxias, K., Kapiris,P., Dologlou, E., Kopanas, J.,  Bogris, N., Antonopoulos, G., Peratzakis, 
A. and Hadjicontis, V. EM anomalies before the Kozani earthquake: A study of their behavior 
through laboratory experiments.  Geophysical Research Letters, Vol. 29, NO. 8, 1228, 
10.1029/2001 GL013786, 2002. 
 
7. Eftaxias, K., L. Athanasopoulou, G. Balasis, M. Kalimeri, S. Nikolopoulos, Y. Contoyiannis, 
J., Kopanas, G. Antonopoulos and C. Nomicos. Unfolding the procedure of characterizing 
recorded ultralow frequency, kHZ and MHz electromagnetic anomalies prior to the L’Aquila 
earthquake as preseismic ones – Part 1, Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., 9, 1953– 1971, 2009. 
 
8. Eftaxias, K., Balasis, G., Contoyiannis, Y., Papadimitriou, C., Kalimeri, M., Athanasopoulou, 
L., Nikolopoulos, S., Kopanas, J., Antonopoulos, G., Nomicos, C. Unfolding the procedure of 
characterizing recorded ultra low frequency, kHZ and MHz electromagnetic anomalies prior to 
the L’Aquila earthquake as pre-seismic ones – Part 2. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 10, 275–
294, 2010.  http://dx.doi.org/10.5194/nhess-10-275-2010. 
 
9. Eftaxias, K., Potirakis,S.M., and Chelidze,T. On the puzzling feature of the silence of 
precursory electromagnetic emissions. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., 13, 2381–2397, 2013. 
www.nat-hazards-earth-syst-sci.net/13/2381/2013/. doi:10.5194/nhess-13-2381-2013. 
 
10. Eftaxias, K.; Potirakis, S.M.; Contoyiannis, Y. Four-stage model of earthquake generation in 
terms of fracture-induced electromagnetic emissions. In Complexity of Seismic Time Series: 
Measurement and Application; A review: In Chelidze, T., Vallianatos, F., Telesca, L., Eds.; 
Elsevier: Oxford, UK, 2018; pp. 437–502. 

--- Sayfa 9 ---
 
9 
 
 
11. Johnston, M. J. S. Review of Electric and Magnetic Fields Accompanying Seismic and 
Volcanic Activity. Surveys in Geophysics 18:  441–475,1997. 
 
12. Kachakhidze, M.K., Kachakhidze, N.,K., Kaladze,T.D. A model of the generation of 
electromagnetic emissions detected prior to earthquakes. Physics and Chemistry of the Earth 
85–86, 78–8, 2015. 
 
13. Kachakhidze, M., Kachakhidze-Murphy, N., Biagi, P.F.  Earthquake Forecasting Possible  
Methodology. GESJ: Physics. No.1(15), pp.102-111, 2016. 
 
14. Kachakhidze, M., Kachakhidze-Murphy, N., Khvitia, B., Ramishvili, G. Large earthquake 
prediction methods. Open J. Earthq. Res. 8:239–254 (2019). 
 
15. Mjachkin, V.I., W.F. Brace, G.A. Sobolev and J.H. Dieterich. Two models for earthquake 
forerunners, Pageoph., Basel. 1975, vol. 113; 
 
16. Papadopoulos, G. A., Charalampakis, M., Fokaefs, A. and Minadakis, G. Strong foreshock 
signal preceding the L’Aquila (Italy) earthquake (Mw6.3) of 6 April 2009, Nat. Hazards Earth 
Syst. Sci., 10, 19–24, 2010. 
 
17. Potirakis  M. Stelios, Alexander Schekotov, Yiannis Contoyiannis, Georgios Balasis, Grigorios 
E. Koulouras, Nikolaos S. Melis, Adamantia Zoe Boutsi , Masashi Hayakawa, Konstantinos 
Eftaxias and Constantinos Nomicos. On Possible Electromagnetic Precursors to a Significant 
Earthquake (Mw = 6.3) Occurred in Lesvos (Greece) on 12 June 2017. Entropy 2019, 21, 241; 
doi:10.3390/e21030241 www.mdpi.com/journal/entropy. 
 
18. Rozhnoi, A., Solovieva, M., Molchanov, O., Schwingenschuh, K., Boudjada, M., Biagi, P.F.,  
Maggipinto,T., Castellana,L., Ermini, A.,  and Hayakawa, M. Anomalies in VLF radio signals 
prior the Abruzzo earthquake (M = 6.3) on 6 April 2009, Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., 9, 1727–
1732, 2009. 
 
19. Ulomov, V. I. Ordering of geostructure and seismicity in seismoactive regions. Seismicity and 
seismic zoning of Northern Eurasia, Moscow, Vol. 1, 27–31, 1993. 
 
20. Wyss Max, Technical Comments, www.sciencemag.org. Science. Vol. 278. 17 October 1997. 
 
21. Wyss Max, Evaluation  of proposed earthquake precursors. Pure and Applied Geophysics. 
v.149. pp. 3-16,  1997.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
