
--- Sayfa 1 ---
Medical Speech Symptoms Classification via
Disentangled Representation
Jianzong Wang1†, Pengcheng Li1,2† , Xulong Zhang1B , Ning Cheng1, Jing Xiao1
1Ping An Technology (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd.
2University of Science and Technology of China
jzwang@188.com, pechola.lee@outlook.com, zhangxulong@ieee.org,
{chengning211, xiaojing661}@pingan.com.cn
Abstract—Intent is defined for understanding spoken language
in existing works. Both textual features and acoustic features
involved in medical speech contain intent, which is important
for symptomatic diagnosis. In this paper, we propose a medical
speech classification model named DRSC that automatically
learns to disentangle intent and content representations from
textual-acoustic data for classification. The intent representations
of the text domain and the Mel-spectrogram domain are extracted
via intent encoders, and then the reconstructed text feature and
the Mel-spectrogram feature are obtained through two exchanges.
After combining the intent from two domains into a joint
representation, the integrated intent representation is fed into
a decision layer for classification. Experimental results show that
our model obtains an average accuracy rate of 95% in detecting
25 different medical symptoms.
Index Terms—medical speech, multi-modal neural network,
speech representation disentanglement
I. INTRODUCTION
The questioning ability of medical students needs to be
accumulated for a long time [1], however, it is difficult for
schools to allow students to study for decades to achieve a
high level of questioning ability. The current solution is to
recognize intent from doctor-patient interviews [2], by anno-
tating the intent of the utterances in advance. Blackley et al.
[3] point out that speech recognition for clinic documentation
is increasingly common, but is also heterogeneous. Narayanan
et al. [4] propose a speech system that focuses on speech
recognition, translation and dialogue management, aiming to
assist in medical communication.
With the development of deep learning in recent years,
various intelligent medical signal processing or healthcare
systems based on deep learning are proposed [5]. The general
idea behind these diagnosing symptoms is to convert speech
to text via automatic speech recognition (ASR) models, and
then perform sentence grammar analysis on the text.
However, human speech contains not only textual informa-
tion (i.e. linguistic information) but also a variety of acoustic
information (e.g. pitch, rhythm and emotion) related to the
intent [6]. But most early deep learning works ignore the
acoustic feature of patients’ speeches. SpeechIC [6] is a
intent classification model which extracts intent from text and
audio domains. They design a model that uses both textual
† Equal contribution.
B Corresponding author.
features and acoustic features for intent detection, and learns
the embedding from textual and acoustic features through
a convolutional neural network (CNN), then directly fuses
the features of the two domains. But the success of these
methods is due to the powerful feature extraction capabilities
of CNN, which does not specifically analyze intent features
related to medical symptoms speech. The extraction of intent
for classification faces challenges, as the efficiency of the
extraction process can only be restricted by the classification
results.
In order to effectively disentangle intent representations
from medical speech and improve the accuracy of medical
speech symptoms classification, we propose a model named
DRSC which disentangles intent information from both text
and Mel-spectrogram domains. The multi-modal model puts
textual and acoustic features into the generative network sep-
arately for disentanglement, the disentangled representations
are then fused and sent to a classifier for medical symptoms
classification. In this way, information related to symptoms is
extracted from both textual and acoustic features of speech and
then contributes to the diagnosis of symptoms. Experimental
results show that DRSC achieves satisfactory performance,
and the experiments on inaccurate transcriptions show that
our model owns robustness. Our main contributions can be
summarized as follows:
• We introduce a multi-modal representation disentangling
framework that factorizes domain-specific content fea-
tures and domain-invariant symptom intent features.
• Our proposed model achieves competitive performance in
terms of accuracy and robustness on the Medical Speech,
Transcription, Intent dataset.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Medical Speech Symptoms Classification
A common solution for medical speech symptoms classifi-
cation is to conduct feature engineering in the textual domain
and combine neural networks for classification [7]. However,
this series of methods only consider text but ignore the original
acoustic information of speech. Because speech with the same
text content may carry different intent information due to the
speaking condition, these acoustic features are essential for
understanding the underlying problems of patients. Previous
arXiv:2403.05000v3  [cs.AI]  30 Apr 2024

--- Sayfa 2 ---
Ec
Ei
T
“I feel a little 
headache.”
Ei
Ec
Gmel
M
u
Gtext
v
Ec
Ei
Ei
Ec
Gmel
Gtext
Ei
Ei
intent (M)
Fusion
Classifier
intent (T)
text
Mel-spectrogram
#M
#T
cycle-consist loss
distribution loss
Fig. 1.
Architecture and basic training objectives of DRSC, the model disentangles intent representations from text and Mel-spectrogram domains. Intent
information extracted from the two domains is then fused for classification.
studies [8], [9] show that the combination of textual features
and acoustic features achieves good performance in speech
emotion classification. With the development of deep learning,
Mittal et al. [10] propose a multi-modal model named M3ER
that extracts cues from face, text and speech for emotion
recognition, and its test conducted on multi-modal datasets
achieves good results.
B. Generative Adversarial Network
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [11] consists of a
generator G and a discriminator D and its training approach
is based on a game theory. In order to achieve the best
performance, D is trained to distinguish a real sample x from
a synthetic sample G(z) created by G with random noise z,
and G is trained to synthesize samples as realistic as possible
that can cheat D. In general, the adversarial relation between
G and D is formulated in Eq. 1:
min
G max
D V (D, G) = Ex∼p(x)[log D(x)]+
Ez∼p(z)[log(1 −D(G(z)))]
(1)
where E represents the expected value and z follows sample
distribution p(z). D is trained to minimize log D(x) while
G is trained to minimize log(1 −D(G(z))) (i.e. maximize
log(D(G(z)))). In other words, G and D are optimized by
the following formulas respectively:
max
D VD(D, G) = Ex∼p(x)[log(D(x)]+
Ez∼p(z)[log(1 −D(G(z)))]
(2)
max
G VG(D, G) = Ez∼p(z)[log(D(G(x))]
(3)
Research on GAN can be divided into two categories. One
is to enhance the stability of the training [12], and the other
is to apply GAN to specific tasks [13], [14]. In this paper,
we leverage GAN to disentangle speech representations for
medical speech symptoms classification.
C. Representation Disentanglement
Learning the disentangled representations of interpretable
generative factors of data is one of the foundations to allow
artificial intelligence to think like people. Many types of
research achieve successful representation disentanglement of
image and speech for various low-level tasks, such as image
translation [15] and voice conversion [16]. Mathieu et al.
[17] combine conditional generative adversarial network and
variational autoencoder for disentanglement. Odena et al. [18]
introduce an auxiliary classifier, which can achieve class-
related representation disentanglement. Lee et al. [15] intro-
duces a novel cross-cycle consistency loss to embed images
into two spaces for representation disentanglement, and DRVC
[19] leverages this framework for voice conversion.
III. METHOD
The front-end framework of DRSC is inspired by an image
style transferring model, DRIT [15]. Considering our multi-
domain classification task, the key point to our method is the
disentanglement of intent representations related to medical
speech classification task from both text and Mel-spectrogram
domains, and the disentangled information must be highly
relevant to this medical task, in order to achieve efficient
medical speech symptoms classification. We are going to
introduce the proposed model and analyze its modules as well
as loss functions.
A. GAN-based Disentanglement
As shown in Fig. 1, DRSC leverages GAN for speech
representation disentanglement. In order to extract features
highly correlated to the true intent, we use an operation
called cross and restore for representation disentanglement
and jointly use three designed loss functions to ensure the
performance of disentanglement.

--- Sayfa 3 ---
Ei
T
“I feel a little 
headache.”
Ei
M
text
Mel-spectrogram
intent (M)
Fusion
Classifier
intent (T)
Fig. 2. In the inference stage, we only need to use the trained intent encoder
to extract intent representations from two domains for classification.
Our front-end framework consists of four groups of content
encoders, intent encoders and generators. The network takes
textual feature T (i.e. word vectors) and acoustic feature M
(i.e. Mel-spectrogram) as inputs. Then disentangle the content
and intent representations through the content encoder and
intent encoder respectively. Firstly, exchange the intent repre-
sentations between the text domain and the Mel-spectrogram
domain, (i.e. the content representation from the text domain
and the intent representation from the Mel-spectrogram do-
main are fed into the generator to generator Gtext to obtain
u, while the content representation from the Mel-spectrogram
domain and the intent representation from the text domain
are fed to generate v), then repeat the representation disen-
tanglement and exchange the intent representations from two
domains (i.e. intent representations extracted from u and v) for
the second time, as well as feeding the content representations
to the generators respectively. Finally, the text features ˆT and
Mel-spectrogram features ˆ
M are reconstructed.
We embed the text domain and Mel-spectrogram domain en-
coding into shared intent space Zi and domain-specific content
spaces ZcT , ZcM , that is to say, the intent encoders disentangle
intent representations from two domains into Zi, while the
content encoders disentangle the remaining different content
representations from two domains into ZcT and ZcM , as shown
in Eq. 4. Our proposed method is based on an assumption that
must be established: common intent information exists in both
the text domain and the Mel-spectrogram domain, and it is
indistinguishable.
{zc
text, zi
text} = {Ec
text(T), Ei
text(T)}
{zc
mel, zi
mel} = {Ec
mel(M), Ei
mel(M)}
(4)
where zc
text is the content representation disentangled from
the text domain, zi
text is the intent representation in the text
domain, and the same goes for zc
mel and zi
mel.
During the inference stage, as shown in Fig. 2, we only
need to use the parameter-trained intent encoder to disentan-
gle the intent representations from the given text and Mel-
spectrogram, and then perform feature fusion on these two
extracted intent representations in the intent space, finally put
the fused representation into the softmax layer for classifica-
tion.
The content encoder and intent encoder in DRSC are com-
posed of a convolution bank which contains various kernels
with different sizes, as well as multiple Conv1d blocks
with residual connections. The intent encoder outputs intent
representation through a dense block after convolution. The
generator is also composed of several Conv1d blocks with
residual connections.
B. Feature Fusion Layer
Since DRSC conducts classification according to multi-
modal information, the fusion of intent information is nec-
essary for its decision. We introduce feature-level fusion for
DRSC as the representations from two domains disentangled
via DRSC are both in the same space Zi, and can directly
perform feature-level fusion. The feature fusion layer is simply
composed of fully connected layers, which fuse intent repre-
sentations extracted from the text and Mel-spectrogram into a
joint representation.
C. Loss Functions
DRSC disentangles representations in the text domain and
Mel-spectrogram domain into a shared intent space Zi and
domain-specific content spaces ZcT , ZcM . Intent space aims
to encode information related to intent classification from the
two domains, while the content feature space aims to encode
specific information remaining in each domain.
1) Cycle-consist Loss: To classify medical conditions and
use GAN for multi-modal decoupling representations, the
premise is that the intent of the text domain and the intent
of the Mel-spectrogram domain are theoretically exactly the
same. Based on this assumption, as the intent encoders dis-
entangle similar intent representations from the text domain
and the Mel-spectrogram domain, we introduce a cyclic-
consistency loss function to guide the re-extracted intent repre-
sentation towards the previously extracted representation after
two representation-exchange processes. The cyclic consistency
constraint includes two stages:
• Cross: Perform intent representation disentanglement and
content representation disentanglement in text domain
and Mel-spectrogram domain to obtain {zi
text, zc
text} and
{zi
mel, zc
mel} respectively. Then exchange the intent rep-
resentations, and generate {u, v} through generators.
u = Gtext(zc
text, zi
mel), v = Gmel(zc
mel, zi
text)
(5)
• Restore: Exchange the intent representations again, and
restore the original text feature and Mel-spectrogram
feature through generators.
ˆT = G(zc
u, zi
v), ˆ
M = G(zi
u, zc
v)
(6)
After the cross and restore operation, the original text and
Mel-spectrogram features are reconstructed. To strengthen this
constraint, the cycle-consist loss is defined as follows:
Lcc(T, M, ˆT, ˆ
M) = Loss( ˆT, T) + Loss( ˆ
M, M)
(7)
where T is the text feature, ˆT is the reconstructed text feature,
M is the Mel-spectrogram feature and ˆ
M is the reconstructed

--- Sayfa 4 ---
Mel-spectrogram feature. Loss(·) represents the proper cri-
terion that measures the distance between two variables. As
shown in Fig. 1, ˆT and ˆ
M can be represented by Eq. 8.
ˆT = Gtext(Ec
text(u), Ei
mel(v))
ˆ
M = Gmel(Ec
mel(v), Ei
text(u))
(8)
where the construction of u and v is shown in Eq. 5.
2) Distribution Loss: In order to enable the intent en-
coders Ei to learn the same feature from text domain and
Mel-spectrogram domain, we let encoders encode the recon-
structed features in text and Mel-spectrogram domain to obtain
{Ei
text( ˆT), Ei
mel( ˆ
M)} respectively, then use the distribution
loss to facilitate approximation between them.
Ldistri = Loss(Ei
text( ˆT), Ei
mel( ˆ
M))
(9)
The purpose of Eq. 9 function is to minimize the distance
between them.
3) Classification Loss: After reconstructing the text domain
and Mel-spectrogram domain features, we use the intent
encoder to disentangle the intent representation from the
reconstructed features { ˆT, ˆ
M}, then fuse and classify the
intent features of the two domains, where cross-entropy loss is
used as the classification loss. Classification loss shown in Eq.
10 ensures that the representations disentangled by the intent
encoder are intent features related to the classification task.
LCE = H(ˆy, y) = −
X
y log(soft max(ˆy))
(10)
where ˆy is the network prediction output, softmax(·) presents
the prediction output ˆy in the form of probability, while y
represents the ground-truth label.
4) VAE Loss: To assist the reconstruction of text and Mel-
spectrogram features, we use the latent variable space and
encourage the representation from the latent variable space
to be as close as possible to the prior Gaussian distribution,
thus we leverage Kullback Leibler (KL) loss:
LKL = E[DKL((zc)||Rs)]
(11)
where DKL(p||q) =
nP
i=1
p(xi) log p(xi)
q(xi), Rs is a random
sample obeys distribution N(0, 1).
5) Latent Regression Loss: We use latent space regression
loss to encourage the invertible mapping between the text
domain or Mel-spectrogram domain and the latent space. We
randomly sample a content latent vector z from Gaussian
distribution and try to reconstruct it via the generator G:
Llr = Loss(Ec
text(Gtext(Ei
text(T), zc
text), zc
text)+
Loss(Ec
mel(Gmel(Ei
mel(M), zc
mel), zc
mel)
(12)
where zc
text is a randomly selected latent vector in text domain,
zc
mel is a randomly selected latent vector in Mel-spectrogram
domain.
6) Adversarial Loss: A domain adversarial loss Ladv is also
provided, as text or Mel-spectrogram discriminator attempts
to discriminate between real feature and generated feature
(i.e. reconstructed feature) in each domain, and text or Mel-
spectrogram generator tries to generate feature closer to reality.
The last three losses are additional and optional. Combined
with the above analysis and elaboration, it means that the
overall objective function of our model is:
min
G,E max
D λ1Lcc + λ2Ldistri + λ3LCE
+(λiLKL + λiiLlr + λiiiLadv)
(13)
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Dataset and Data-Preprocessing
We use pre-processed Medical Speech, Transcription, Intent
dataset to evaluate the classification performance of DRSC.
The dataset contains 6, 661 audio segments of varying lengths,
including 25 types of symptom conditions, as shown in Fig. 3.
Due to the low quality of some audio samples in the dataset,
we apply a forward-backward digital filter to preserve filter
characteristics from the unfiltered signals, thereby reducing
their impact on the classification experiments [20]. These
filters perform zero-phase filtering in both the forward and
backward directions [21]. Short time Fourier transform is
conducted to obtain Mel-spectrograms from waveforms. We
randomly select 20% of the data from each symptom category
as the test set, with approximately 35 ∼55 samples per
category. To verify the robustness of our classification model,
we additionally use the inaccurate text transcriptions obtained
from a pre-trained ASR model as text input.
Fig. 3. Statistics of symptom types in the dataset.
B. Implementation Details
A sampling of 16, 000 Hz is used for all the speech audio,
256-bank Mel-spectrogram is generated through short-time
Fourier transform (STFT). The experiment is conducted on
a single Tesla V100. We use an Adam Optimizer [22] on a
batch of size 16 with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, ϵ = 1 × 10−8
and lr = 1×10−4, dropout is applied during training to avoid
over-fitting. We experiment with equal weights for each loss
component in Eq. 13.

--- Sayfa 5 ---
(a) SpeechIC (Mel-Txt-combined)
(b) DRSC
Fig. 4. Confusion matrixes of the baseline method’s and proposed method’s
classification results. SpeechIC uses both Mel-spectrogram and text as input,
obtaining better results than using Mel-spectrogram or text only.
C. Compared Methods
We use the speech intention classification (SpeechIC), a
CNN model proposed by Gu et al. [6], as the baseline
model, which takes either Mel-spectrogram, text, or both Mel-
spectrogram and text as input. SpeechIC mainly consists of
a multi-layer convolutional encoder, a feature fusion layer
and a classification prediction layer. The original intention
classification model is modified to complete symptoms classi-
fication task. We evaluate the following models to compare the
performance of the baseline method and our proposed method.
SpeechIC Txt-only: only provide text as input for SpeechIC.
SpeechIC Mel-only: only provide Mel-spectrogram as input
for SpeechIC.
SpeechIC Mel-Txt-combined: provide both Mel-spectrogram
and text as input for SpeechIC.
DRSC: The model we proposed takes in text and Mel-
spectrogram to perform disentangling representation of symp-
toms intent.
D. Evaluation Results
Firstly, we select different loss functions for Eq. 7, Eq. 9 and
Eq. 12, and find out the proper distance criterion. As shown in
Table I, L1(·) brings the best performance for DRSC, where
L1 Loss=||a, b||1, L2 Loss=||a, b||2, KL Loss=DKL(a||b).
Therefore, we choose L1(·) as the distance metric in our loss
function for the subsequent experiments.
TABLE I
THE EFFECT OF DIFFERENT DISTANCE LOSS FUNCTIONS.
Loss Function
Accuracy (%)
L1 (Manhattan distance)
95.58
L2 (Euclidean distance)
94.34
cosine distance
94.66
After determining the distance criterion of DRSC, we com-
pare our proposed model with SpeechIC, using the confusion
matrix and classification accuracy as evaluation indicators. The
accuracy of each model is shown in Table II, and the confusion
matrix is showcased in Fig. 4.
TABLE II
THE CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY OF VARIOUS METHODS IN THE
CLASSIFICATION OF MEDICAL SPEECH SYMPTOMS.
Method
Accuracy (%)
SpeechIC Txt-only
67.65
SpeechIC Mel-only
73.04
SpeechIC Mel-Txt-combined
82.47
DRSC
95.58
The results show that our proposed representation disentan-
glement model has better accuracy than SpeechIC in medical
speech symptoms classification. Our analysis of the confusion
matrixes in Fig. 4 finds that our proposed model demonstrates
a significant advantage in classification results compared to the
baseline model SpeechIC, achieving almost 100% accuracy
in the diagnosis of certain symptoms (e.g. stomachache, foot
ache). However, the classification of certain symptoms like
joint pain, is not so satisfactory.
To verify the effect of the proposed additional optional
loss functions, we conduct an ablation study to evaluate the
additional loss functions mentioned. It can be easily seen from
Table III that the additional loss functions bring significant
improvement in classification accuracy.
Finally, considering the difficulty of manually labelling
speech text in practical scenarios, we explore the robustness

--- Sayfa 6 ---
TABLE III
EXPLORE THE EFFECT OF THE ADDITIONAL LOSS FUNCTION.
Method
Accuracy (%)
w/o additional optional loss
81.19
DRSC
95.58
of DRSC, we use the pseudo speech text automatically tran-
scribed via an ASR model as the text input of DRSC, as the
ASR model cannot produce a very accurate transcription from
speech data, there is a 26% word error rate. However, our
results from Table IV show that despite the use of imprecise
transcriptions, DRSC is only 4% lower in prediction accuracy
than using accurate text transcriptions. In the case of text-
only for SpeechIC, the prediction accuracy is reduced by 9%,
and the prediction accuracy of SpeechIC using both text and
Mel-spectrogram is reduced by 8% in the case of inaccurate
transcription of the text, which shows that our model is more
robust, making accurate text transcription for medical intent
classification is unnecessary.
TABLE IV
EXPLORE THE ROBUSTNESS OF THE MODEL.
Method
Text input
Accuracy (%)
SpeechIC (Txt-only)
accurate
67.65
SpeechIC (Txt-only)
inaccurate
58.29
SpeechIC (Mel-Txt-combined)
accurate
82.47
SpeechIC (Mel-Txt-combined)
inaccurate
74.73
DRSC
accurate
95.58
DRSC
inaccurate
91.43
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a medical classification model
named DRSC which extracts intent information from both text
and Mel-spectrogram domains for decision. With cross and
restore operations, intent representations and content represen-
tations are disentangled into the shared intent feature space
and domain-specific content spaces, respectively. The intent
representations from the text domain and the Mel-spectrogram
domain are fused and used for medical classification. Experi-
mental results show that DRSC outperforms existing methods
in classification accuracy and owns robustness when facing
inaccurate text transcriptions.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This paper is supported by the Key Research and De-
velopment Program of Guangdong Province (grant No.
2021B0101400003). Corresponding author is Xulong Zhang
(zhangxulong@ieee.org) from Ping An Technology (Shen-
zhen) Co., Ltd.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Daniel, J. Rencic, S. J. Durning, E. Holmboe, S. A. Santen,
V. Lang, T. Ratcliffe, D. Gordon, B. Heist, S. Lubarsky et al., “Clinical
reasoning assessment methods: a scoping review and practical guidance,”
Academic Medicine, vol. 94, no. 6, pp. 902–912, 2019.
[2] R. Rojowiec, B. Roth, and M. Fink, “Intent recognition in doctor-patient
interviews,” in Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, 2020,
pp. 702–709.
[3] S. V. Blackley, J. Huynh, L. Wang, Z. Korach, and L. Zhou, “Speech
recognition for clinical documentation from 1990 to 2018: a systematic
review,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association,
vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 324–338, 2019.
[4] S. Narayanan, S. Ananthakrishnan, R. S. Belvin, E. Ettelaie, S. Gandhe,
S. Ganjavi et al., “The transonics spoken dialogue translator: An aid
for english-persian doctor-patient interviews.” in AAAI Technical Report
(4), 2004, pp. 97–103.
[5] G. Muhammad, F. Alshehri, F. Karray, A. El Saddik, M. Alsulaiman,
and T. H. Falk, “A comprehensive survey on multimodal medical signals
fusion for smart healthcare systems,” Information Fusion, vol. 76, pp.
355–375, 2021.
[6] Y. Gu, X. Li, S. Chen, J. Zhang, and I. Marsic, “Speech intention
classification with multimodal deep learning,” Advances in Artificial
Intelligence. Canadian Society for Computational Studies of Intelligence.
Conference, vol. 10233, pp. 260–271, 2017.
[7] K. R. Talbot, M.-T. Gruber, and R. Nishida, Eds., The Psychological
Experience of Integrating Content and Language. Multilingual Matters,
2021.
[8] S. Yoon, S. Byun, and K. Jung, “Multimodal speech emotion recognition
using audio and text,” in IEEE Spoken Language Technology Workshop,
2018, pp. 112–118.
[9] A. Christy, S. Vaithyasubramanian, A. Jesudoss, and M. A. Praveena,
“Multimodal speech emotion recognition and classification using con-
volutional neural network techniques,” International Journal of Speech
Technology, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 381–388, 2020.
[10] T. Mittal, U. Bhattacharya, R. Chandra, A. Bera, and D. Manocha,
“M3er: Multiplicative multimodal emotion recognition using facial,
textual, and speech cues,” in AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
vol. 34, no. 02, 2020, pp. 1359–1367.
[11] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley,
S. Ozair et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2014, pp. 2672–2680.
[12] M. Shahbazi, M. Danelljan, D. P. Paudel, and L. Van Gool, “Collapse
by conditioning: Training class-conditional gans with limited data,” in
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
[13] Y. Bai, Y. Zhang, M. Ding, and B. Ghanem, “Sod-mtgan: Small object
detection via multi-task generative adversarial network,” in European
Conference on Computer Vision, 2018, pp. 206–221.
[14] N. K. Singh and K. Raza, “Medical image generation using generative
adversarial networks: A review,” Health informatics: A Computational
Perspective in Healthcare, pp. 77–96, 2021.
[15] H. Lee, H. Tseng, J. Huang, M. Singh, and M. Yang, “Diverse image-to-
image translation via disentangled representations,” in European Con-
ference on Computer Vision, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
vol. 11205, 2018, pp. 36–52.
[16] S. Yang, M. Tantrawenith, H. Zhuang, Z. Wu, A. Sun, J. Wang et al.,
“Speech representation disentanglement with adversarial mutual infor-
mation learning for one-shot voice conversion,” in Annual Conference of
the International Speech Communication Association, 2022, pp. 2553–
2557.
[17] M. Mathieu, J. J. Zhao, P. Sprechmann, A. Ramesh, and Y. LeCun, “Dis-
entangling factors of variation in deep representation using adversarial
training,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016,
pp. 5041–5049.
[18] A. Odena, C. Olah, and J. Shlens, “Conditional image synthesis with
auxiliary classifier gans,” in International Conference on Machine
Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 70, 2017,
pp. 2642–2651.
[19] Q. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Wang, N. Cheng, and J. Xiao, “DRVC: A
framework of any-to-any voice conversion with self-supervised learn-
ing,” in IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing, 2022, pp. 3184–3188.
[20] H. A. Abdulmohsin, B. Al-Khateeb, S. S. Hasan, and R. Dwivedi,
“Automatic illness prediction system through speech,” Computers and
Electrical Engineering, vol. 102, p. 108224, 2022.
[21] F. Gustafsson, “Determining the initial states in forward-backward
filtering,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 44, no. 4, pp.
988–992, 1996.
[22] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
in International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.
