
--- Sayfa 1 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. XX, NO. X, FEBRUARY 2024
1
Real-time Seismic Intensity Prediction using
Self-supervised Contrastive GNN for Earthquake
Early Warning
Rafid Umayer Murshed, Member, IEEE, Kazi Noshin, Md. Anu Zakaria,
Md. Forkan Uddin, Member, IEEE, A. F. M. Saiful Amin, and Mohammed Eunus Ali∗
Abstract—Seismic intensity prediction from early or initial seis-
mic waves received by a few seismic stations can enhance Earth-
quake Early Warning (EEW) systems, particularly in ground
motion-based approaches like PLUM. While many operational
EEW systems currently utilize point-source-based models that
estimate the warning area based on magnitude and distance mea-
sures, direct intensity prediction offers a potential improvement
in accuracy and reliability. In this paper, we propose a novel deep
learning approach, Seismic Contrastive Graph Neural Network
(SC-GNN), for highly accurate seismic intensity prediction using
a small portion of initial seismic waveforms from a few seismic
stations. The SC-GNN consists of two key components: (i)
a graph neural network (GNN) to propagate spatiotemporal
information through a graph-like structure representing seis-
mic station distribution and wave propagation, and (ii) a self-
supervised contrastive learning component to train the network
with larger time windows and enable predictions using shorter
initial waveforms. The efficacy of our approach is demonstrated
through experiments on three real-world seismic datasets, where
it shows superior performance over existing techniques, including
a significant reduction in mean squared error (MSE) and the
lowest standard deviation of error, indicating its robustness,
reliability, and strong positive relationship between predicted and
actual values. Notably, the SC-GNN model maintains superior
performance even with 5s input waveforms, making it especially
suitable for enhancing EEW applications.
Index Terms—Earthquake Early Warning (EEW), Seismic In-
tensity Prediction, Contrastive Learning, Graph Neural Network.
I. INTRODUCTION
E
ARTHQUAKES represent a major threat to lives and
property, as exemplified by the devastating M7.8 Turkey-
Syria earthquake on February 6, 2023. This event caused
over fifty thousand fatalities and inflicted extensive eco-
nomic, infrastructural, and cultural heritage damage [1]. While
Earthquake Early Warning (EEW) systems cannot prevent
earthquake damages, they are crucial in reducing fatalities
by providing advance warning [2]. EEW systems, which
R. U. Murshed (e-mail: rafid.buet.eee16@gmail.com), K. Noshin, and M. A.
Zakaria are with the BUET-Japan Institute of Disaster Prevention and Urban
Safety (JIDPUS), Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology,
Dhaka 1000.
M. F. Uddin is with the Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineer-
ing, Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology, Dhaka 1000.
A. F. M. S. Amin is with the Department of Civil Engineering and BUET-
JIDPUS, Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology, Dhaka 1000.
M. E. Ali is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology, Dhaka 1000. e-mail:
eunus@cse.buet.ac.bd.
∗The corresponding author.
detect initial seismic waves (P-waves), offer critical seconds
to minutes of warning before the more destructive waves
(S and surface waves) arrive. However, it is important to
note that most operational EEW systems use point-source-
based models, estimating the warning area based on magnitude
and distance, rather than direct intensity prediction. Ground
motion-based EEW systems like PLUM, which rely on seismic
intensity prediction, are essential for forecasting an earth-
quake’s potential impact at different geographical locations
[3]. This critical predictive element plays a pivotal role in
delivering actionable information, facilitating prompt safety
measures to alleviate the repercussions of seismic events on
human life and infrastructure.
The history of EEW systems and seismic intensity pre-
diction spans several decades, with initial efforts focused
on detecting early seismic waves like P-waves to provide
short lead times for warnings. Despite advancements in seis-
mic monitoring networks and computational techniques, it
is important to note that almost all operational EEW sys-
tems worldwide currently rely on point-source-based models.
More sophisticated methods for seismic intensity prediction,
including physics-based models, empirical relationships, and
machine learning algorithms, are predominantly in the research
phase (e.g., [4], [5]).
Traditional methods for seismic prediction tasks have pri-
marily utilized empirical models and classical machine learn-
ing techniques. Ground motion prediction equations (GMPEs),
which are often empirical models derived from fitting data
to strong motion records, are widely used to estimate ground
motion parameters like PGA and SA, considering source, path,
and site parameters [6]. Classical machine learning techniques,
such as support vector machines (SVMs) [7] and artificial
neural networks (ANNs) [8], [9], have been explored to esti-
mate ground motion parameters or predict seismic events. For
a comprehensive understanding of different machine learning
approaches for GMPE building, readers are referred to [10].
Deep learning has gained popularity in various domains
in recent years due to its ability to learn complex represen-
tations from large datasets [11]–[13]. Recent advancements
in deep learning have significantly influenced seismic data
processing and model building in seismology [14]. Its ability
to learn complex representations from large datasets makes it
particularly suitable for processing seismic data, offering new
avenues for understanding and predicting seismic phenomena.
For instance, deep learning has been applied to earthquake
arXiv:2306.14336v4  [eess.SP]  28 Mar 2024

--- Sayfa 2 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. XX, NO. X, FEBRUARY 2024
2
Fig. 1: Seismic intensity prediction with SC-GNN
detection [15], magnitude estimation [5], and location and
origin time estimation [16], [17]. These applications include
the use of convolutional neural networks (CNNs), recurrent
neural networks (RNNs), and other architectures. Notably,
[10], [14] provide comprehensive overviews of various deep
learning approaches in this field, highlighting their potential
and limitations. Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) have
been used to reduce false triggers from local noises [18]. More-
over, deep learning techniques have been employed in EEW
systems and seismic intensity prediction tasks, demonstrating
promising results in terms of accuracy and speed. In [19], a
CNN-based technique has been used to predict ground motion
intensity due to earthquakes using a 10s window from the
earthquake origin time without requiring prior knowledge of
earthquake sources. Transfer learning has also been used to
predict ground shaking of an area due to earthquake [20]. A
graph convolutional network (GCN) based approach, namely
TISER-GCN, for multivariate time-series regression is pro-
posed in [21]. This approach is tested on two seismic datasets
for intensity prediction and demonstrates promising results
with an average MSE reduction of 16.3%— an improvement
compared to [19].
The ROSERS framework proposed in [22] prioritizes on-site
EEW using DNN and variational autoencoders. Early p-waves
and site features are used to estimate the acceleration response
spectrum (Sa(T)) of ground-motion waveforms at the station
of interest. Instead of using waveforms from local stations to
predict intensities at remote sites, ROSERS requires data from
the seismic station being studied. In broad geographic early
warning scenarios, this localized approach may be inadequate.
In [23], Support Vector Regression (SVR) is used to estimate
PGA from P-wave features collected from vertical ground
acceleration at a station. It evaluates its on-site prediction
model using previous earthquake data. This approach can
underestimate PGA for earthquakes with complex slip propa-
gation and is also confined to predictions at the data station.
The transformer-based TEAM model [24] focuses on EEW
by capturing sequential patterns in seismic data; however,
it predicts intensity distributions rather than specific values.
This approach suffers from high computational complexity and
can not adequately handle the spatiotemporal characteristics
inherent to seismic data for highly accurate seismic intensity
prediction at geographically distant locations, as found in our
empirical evaluation.
The effectiveness of seismic intensity prediction algorithms
varies significantly between point-source EEW systems and
ground-motion-based EEW systems. While point-source EEW
systems estimate the earthquake’s location, depth, and mag-
nitude to infer intensity, ground-motion-based systems, such
as PLUM, directly estimate the upcoming intensity using
network-wide ground motion observations, bypassing estima-
tions of magnitude and location. This distinction is crucial
for understanding the inherent limitations of each approach.
For instance, traditional methods, including physics-based
modeling and classical machine learning techniques, may not
adequately address the complexities of seismic data, leading
to challenges in real-time accuracy for both types of systems
[25]. Furthermore, while deep learning has advanced seismic
intensity prediction, achieving optimal performance remains
a challenge due to the need for large time windows and
the intricate nature of seismic data [19]–[21]. The precision
of intensity predictions is critical; even minor inaccuracies
can lead to significant consequences, such as over or under-
alerting. In EEW systems, the estimated Modified Mercalli
Intensity (MMI) level determines whether to issue an alert and
the scope of the alerted area. An underestimation by even one
unit of MMI could result in a failure to trigger alerts for events
that should have been recognized. Furthermore, as the damage
caused by an earthquake increases by a factor of 10 for each
1.0-point rise in intensity scale [3], precise predictions are vital

--- Sayfa 3 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. XX, NO. X, FEBRUARY 2024
3
for effective earthquake preparedness and response efforts.
Moreover, every second saved in early warning generation can
increase the alerted area by a few kilometers, protecting many
more lives and properties [26].
Early prediction involves leveraging the initial seismic
waveforms received by proximal seismic stations, extracting
critical earthquake features from these initial waveforms, and
using these features to forecast the seismic intensities at an
array of stations spanning the affected region. Informed by
the limitations of existing EEW systems and seismic intensity
prediction algorithms, we present an approach that utilizes a
relatively small segment of initial seismic waveforms from
multiple seismic stations dispersed across a geographically
sparse region. We aim to accurately predict seismic intensity
at these stations and others in the surrounding area where
the seismic waves have not yet arrived [27]. Recognizing the
graph-like structure of seismic station distribution and their
interaction with seismic wavefield propagation, we employ
a graph neural network (GNN) as the foundation of our
approach [28], [29]. The unique power of GNNs lies in
their ability to propagate information through the nodes of
a graph, allowing us to predict seismic intensity at distant
stations by exploiting a fraction of the information gathered
at the early-receiving stations. In essence, GNNs enable us
to make globally informed predictions with locally available
data. Most importantly, to address the need for shorter time-
window predictions, we incorporate self-supervised contrastive
learning, enabling the model to be trained using larger time
windows while making predictions using shorter ones [30],
[31]. This integration of contrastive learning and specialized
GNN layers results in an effective and efficient approach that
can perform on significantly shorter time windows. Moreover,
the inherent self-supervised nature of this contrastive learning
approach eliminates the necessity for exhaustive labeling of
the input data. We aptly name our proposed model as Seismic
Contrastive GNN (SC-GNN).
We have demonstrated the efficacy of our approach through
a comprehensive series of experiments conducted using three
real-world seismic datasets. Experimental results substantiate
that our approach consistently surpasses the performance
of state-of-the-art techniques across a broad spectrum of
evaluation metrics. In particular, on our principal dataset,
our SC-GNN model demonstrates substantial improvement
with a mean squared error (MSE) of 0.4172, reflecting an
approximately 234% enhancement over the best-performing
state-of-the-art GCN model. Additionally, our model maintains
the lowest standard deviation of error of 0.61 and attains
the highest correlation coefficient, indicating robustness, reli-
ability, and a strong positive relationship between predicted
and actual values. As the input time window diminishes,
our model’s performance remains consistently superior to the
baseline models, underlining its capability to handle variable
input sizes efficiently. The main contributions of this paper are
threefold:
1) We propose a contrasting learning-based deep learning
framework for near real-time seismic intensity predic-
tion that facilitates highly accurate seismic intensity
prediction from much shorter input waveforms than
its competitive methods. Numerical results demonstrate
that our model achieves superior performance (143%
improvement) with an input window length of 5s com-
pared to the 10s window input of the other baseline
models. Also, the self-supervised nature of the proposed
framework eliminates the need for extensive labeled data
during the contrastive training phase.
2) We construct a cutting-edge GNN architecture compris-
ing highly sophisticated graph convolutional and atten-
tion layers that capture the complex spatial relationships
between seismic stations. This allows us to effectively
model the propagation of seismic waves received from
a geographically sparse set of seismic stations.
3) We present the SC-GNN model’s exceptional perfor-
mance compared to baseline models across all standard
metrics. The superior performance is reflected in a sub-
stantially reduced Mean Squared Error (MSE) of 0.41
on the primary dataset, a lower standard deviation of the
error indicating higher reliability, and a high correlation
coefficient of around 84%, suggesting a robust match
between predicted and actual values. Furthermore, the
SC-GNN model promises remarkable utility in EEW
systems, where approximately 70% of the locations po-
tentially receive a warning time of more than 10 seconds,
sufficient for taking various precautionary measures.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II formulates the problem. Section III provides a brief
background on graph neural networks and contrastive learning.
Section IV describes the proposed method, including the
GNN architecture and the self-supervised contrastive learning
framework. Section V presents the experimental setup, results,
and comparisons with existing approaches. Finally, Section VI
concludes the paper and discusses potential future directions.
II. PROBLEM FORMULATION
One of the key challenges of earthquake early warning
(EEW) systems is to predict the seismic intensity in surround-
ing geographical locations at the earliest possible time. As
seismic stations are placed in geographically sparse locations
in a region of interest, initial seismic waves may only be
detected by the few seismic stations located nearby near the
earthquake’s epicenter. Thus, given the few seismic stations
have detected the initial seismic waves, our goal in this paper
is to accurately predict the seismic intensity for all the points
of interest, including the distant seismic stations within a
geographical region of our interest.
Let N = {n1, n2, ...n|N |} be the set of N stations (seis-
mic stations and points of interest). Also, let N ′ ⊂N,
|N ′| ≪|N|, be the set of stations where initial seismic
waves have been recorded, and wi(t) be the seismic wave
of station ni ∈N ′ at time t. Our goal is learn a function F
that can predict the seismic intensities, I1, I2, ..., IN of stations
n1, n2, ...nN, respectively, given the initial seismic waves of
stations in N ′. Mathematically, this can be formulated as
F : (w1(t), w2(t), ..., w|N ′|(t)) 7→(I1, I2, ..., IN).
Figure 2 shows a prototypical example of our problem
setting. In Figure 2(a), the epicenter of the earthquake is shown

--- Sayfa 4 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. XX, NO. X, FEBRUARY 2024
4
Fig. 2: a) Earthquake occurrence and the propagation of seismic waves b) Seismic intensity prediction at seismic stations and
points of interest.
using a starlike symbol, and seven stations, n1, n2, ...n7 are
shown using circles, where two stations, n1 and n2 marked
as blue, have received initial seismic waves at time t, and the
remaining five stations are yet to receive any signal. Now, we
are to learn a function, F, that can predict the seismic intensity
of all seven stations, as depicted in Figure 2(b). The polygon
heatmaps visually represent the intensity in this context.
III. BACKGROUND ON CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND
GNN
This section provides a brief background on the key
concepts of contrastive learning and graph neural networks
(GNNs), which form the basis of our proposed method for
predicting seismic intensity.
A. Contrastive Learning
Contrastive learning is a self-supervised learning approach
that aims to learn useful representations from unlabeled data
by solving a pretext task [32]. The core idea behind contrastive
learning is to encourage similarity between representations of
similar or related instances while maximizing the dissimilarity
between representations of dissimilar or unrelated instances.
This is achieved by designing a contrastive loss function
that minimizes the distance between positive pairs (related
instances) and maximizes the distance between negative pairs
(unrelated instances) in a latent representation space [33].
Contrastive Learning begins with augmentation (see section
IV.A for details) to create two viewpoints of a batch of input
samples. When originating from the same sample, these views
are regarded as positive samples; when from distinct samples,
they are negative samples. An encoder network encodes, and a
projection network maps the augmented samples to a feature
space [34]. This feature space applies a well-designed con-
trastive loss function. Contrastive loss groups positive samples
together and separates negative samples. Doing so clusters
positive samples and disperses negative samples in the feature
space [35].
B. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are a class of deep learn-
ing models designed specifically for learning from graph-
structured data [36], [37]. GNNs can effectively capture the
complex relationships between nodes in a graph by iteratively
aggregating and updating the node features through message-
passing mechanisms [38]. GNNs can handle irregular and non-
Euclidean data structures, making them well-suited for a wide
range of applications, such as social network analysis [39],
molecular modeling [40], and geospatial analysis [41].
The adjacency matrix is an essential element of GNNs, rep-
resenting the graph’s structure. The adjacency matrix, typically
denoted as A, is a square matrix where each element Aij
indicates the presence (often with a 1) or absence (with a
0) of an edge between nodes i and j. This matrix is crucial
for GNNs as it provides the necessary information about the
interconnections between nodes in the graph, allowing the
network to understand and learn from the graph’s topological
features. In some GNN variants, the adjacency matrix is en-
riched with edge weights or additional features that represent
specific characteristics of connections between nodes.
Over time, GNNs have evolved into two primary cate-
gories: spectral methods and spatial methods. Spectral methods
primarily concentrate on the eigenvalues and eigenvectors
of a graph, whereas spatial methods prioritize the graph’s
connectivity [42].
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are driven by a transfer
function that updates the state vector of each node, incorpo-
rating neighborhood information into the node representation.
The expression of the transfer function hu for spatial GNNs is
as follows:
hu = f(xu, xe
u, ne[u], hne[u], xne[u])
(1)
where xu denotes the feature of the node, xeu,ne[u] denotes
the features of the edges connecting with u, hne[u] denotes
the transfer functions of the neighboring nodes of u, and
xne[u] denotes the features of the neighboring nodes of u. The
expression of the output functions is as follows:
ou = g(hu, xu)
(2)

--- Sayfa 5 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. XX, NO. X, FEBRUARY 2024
5
The local transfer functions and the local output functions
are applied to every node in the graph. By repeatedly iter-
ating this process, the GNN gradually converges to a stable
state [43]. GNNs not only have shown efficacy in seismic
intensity prediction but also in earthquake location and phase
association, illustrating their versatility in seismology [10].
This is achieved by capturing spatial relationships between
seismic stations and wave propagation patterns, leading to en-
hanced accuracy and generalization to unseen data. However,
the application of GNNs across different seismic networks,
such as adapting a model trained on California’s network
for use in Japan, presents challenges due to varying network
configurations. This limitation underscores the need for cau-
tious adaptation and potential model retraining for different
geological settings.
IV. PROPOSED SC-GNN METHODOLOGY
In this section, we propose a novel architecture, namely
the seismic Contrastive Graph Neural Network (SC-GNN)
model, that seamlessly integrates contrastive learning [32] with
graph neural networks (GNN) [37] for the fast and accu-
rate seismic intensity prediction. We use GNN to effectively
capture spatiotemporal features from seismic waveform data
from different stations spread across a geographical region.
Despite their strengths, GNNs alone prove insufficient for
early earthquake intensity prediction, as they rely on extended
time window waveforms for feature extraction, which hinders
real-time applications. Therefore, this paper introduces a con-
trastive learning-based approach to learning unique seismic
embeddings for each earthquake event, even from shortened
time-window waveform inputs, which ultimately help us in
fast and accurate seismic intensity prediction.
A. The Key Ideas of Contrastive Learning in Early Earthquake
Prediction
Our contrastive approach primarily aims to learn unique
seismic embeddings for each earthquake event, even from
shortened time-window inputs. This approach is driven by the
fundamental intuition of ensuring similarity in embeddings
generated from differing input window lengths of the same
earthquake event while maintaining distinctness in embeddings
for separate events. Generating analogous embeddings from
full and their corresponding truncated time windows implies
that the model is capable of discerning the same features from
reduced time windows as it does from extended ones. This
proficiency is paramount for early warning systems, where
precise intensity prediction from the shortest possible time
window is the core of the task. Consequently, the sooner the
model can make an accurate prediction, the earlier a warning
can be issued, enhancing the efficacy and utility of the system.
Figure 3 visually illustrates the above concept. An orig-
inal seismic waveform from earthquake E1 is represented
alongside a truncated, zero-padded augmentation, reflecting a
shortened variant of the waveform. A distinct waveform is also
depicted for event E2. Our contrastive learning framework
operates by promoting similarities between the original and
augmented E1 samples’ embeddings while distinguishing the
E1 and E2 samples’ embeddings. This approach facilitates
learning unique seismic embeddings by drawing parallels with
the concept of positive and negative samples in a typical
contrastive learning framework. Furthermore, as earthquake
events do not require any pre-labelling for this task, our
approach can be considered a self-supervised learning tech-
nique. This training structure enables our model to predict
seismic intensities from significantly shorter time windows,
empowering the model to deliver distinct intensity predictions
for each individual earthquake.
B. Architectural Overview of SC-GNN
A schematic representation of SC-GNN in terms of its
functional blocks is shown in Fig. 4.
1) Input Block: The first point of interaction with the
model begins with the input block. The SC-GNN model
accepts 3-component seismic waveforms and an adjacency
matrix representing the relationships between different seismic
stations. The adjacency matrix is crucial in conveying spatial
correlations between stations to the subsequent GNN block.
Inputs are first subjected to TimeDistributed Batch Normaliza-
tion, which not only optimizes the input scale for the network
but also retains the relative amplitude information via the
learned scale (γ) and shift (β) parameters, thereby ensuring
the model’s efficacy in intensity prediction tasks. We denote
the 3-component waveform input of the i-th station by wi(t).
Adjacency Matrix Preparation: To adequately represent
the graph structure of the seismic network, we prepare the
adjacency matrix in a way that considers the mutual distances
between stations, carefully considering the distance reciprocity
and selective thresholding. Here, we outline the steps involved
in preparing the adjacency matrix.
In the first step, we begin with an initial adjacency matrix
which contains the pairwise distances between the seismic
stations. However, considering our objective of inferring the
intensity at distant stations, it is more intuitive to model the
connections between the stations as a function of proximity
rather than the actual distance. Hence, the entries of the
adjacency matrix are inversed, thereby encoding the notion of
reciprocal distance into the adjacency matrix. This results in
closer stations having a higher edge weight than distant ones.
To ensure that the diagonal entries (representing self-loops)
do not introduce bias into the network, they are initially
filled with a large number, essentially representing an ’infinite’
distance. After taking the reciprocal, these diagonal entries
become infinitesimally small. To rectify this, the diagonal ele-
ments are replaced with the maximum value in the transformed
adjacency matrix.
In the next step, the entire adjacency matrix is normalized
by the maximum value, thereby ensuring that all edge weights
fall within the range [0,1].
The final stage of preparing the adjacency matrix involves
thresholding. We calculate the adjacency matrix’s 75th per-
centile (the threshold for the top 25% of values). All edge
weights falling below this threshold are set to zero. This is
done to sparsify the adjacency matrix, effectively retaining
only the strongest connections in the graph and making the

--- Sayfa 6 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. XX, NO. X, FEBRUARY 2024
6
Fig. 3: Contrastive learning within SC-GNN aligns seismic waveform representations from multiple stations, enhancing event-
specific intensity prediction.
Fig. 4: SC-GNN’s workflow: Seismic data from stations feeds into a 1D CNN, then a GCN, followed by either contrastive
learning or intensity prediction.
GNN computation more efficient. The threshold of the top
25% has been determined through extensive empirical study.
Algorithm 1 succinctly presents this entire adjacency matrix
preparation process.
This methodical process of adjacency matrix preparation
enables the efficient representation of the seismic network,
thereby ensuring that our GNN model accurately captures
the crucial characteristics necessary for successful seismic
intensity prediction.
2) 1D CNN Feature Extractor: The normalized seismic
waveforms are then processed by a series of TimeDistributed
1D Convolutional (Conv1D) and MaxPooling layers. These
layers, equipped with swish activation functions, capture and
highlight the essential characteristics in the waveform data.
Dropout layers are added to promote model robustness and
mitigate overfitting, providing a form of regularization. Fol-
Algorithm 1 Preparation of the adjacency matrix
1: Load matrix containing mutual inter-station distances in
Km
2: Fill the diagonal of the matrix with a large value
3: Compute reciprocal of matrix elements, scale by minimum
value in the matrix
4: Replace diagonal elements with the maximum value in the
matrix
5: Normalize the matrix by its maximum value
6: Compute the threshold as the 75th percentile of matrix
elements
7: Set all elements below the threshold to zero
lowing this, the extracted features undergo further refinement
via multiple Conv1D layers with varying kernel sizes and

--- Sayfa 7 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. XX, NO. X, FEBRUARY 2024
7
filters as shown in Fig. 4 (1D CNN Feature Extractor).
Additional Dropout and Batch Normalization layers are in-
terspersed for enhanced regularization and normalization of
the feature vectors. Finally, the extracted features are flattened
and passed through multiple dense layers to reduce the length
of the feature vectors. Mathematically, we can represent the
operation of the 1D CNN feature extractor by
Fi = fCNN(wi(t));
∀i ∈{1, 2, ...., N},
(3)
where Fi denotes the extracted features for the seismic wave-
forms from the i-th station and fCNN(.) indicates the feature
extraction operation performed by the 1D CNN block of SC-
GNN.
In terms of explicit construction, this 1D CNN feature
extractor consists of three Conv1D blocks, one after another.
Each block consists of two Conv1D layers, followed by
a Batchnorm, a max-pooling and a drop-out layer. As we
traverse deeper into the architecture, the number of filters in
the Conv1D layers progressively increases while kernel sizes
decrease. The initial Conv1D layer applies 16 filters with a
kernel size of 50, whereas the deepest layer uses 96 filters
with a kernel size of 4. Moreover, Max Pooling layers have
pool sizes that progressively increase (4, 6, and 12).
The first convolutional block applies zero padding to prevent
excessive feature dimension reduction, while the last two
blocks avoid it to limit noise insertion. After the Conv1D
blocks, the output is flattened and processed through two dense
layers of 256 neurons each, reducing the dimensionality for
the GNN block, where they serve as node features. A Dropout
layer is included post-dense layers to counteract overfitting and
better generalization [44].
3) Graph Neural Network Block: After the feature extrac-
tion, the data advances to the GNN block. In this segment, the
temporal information from the seismic waveforms is paired
with the spatial relationships embedded in the adjacency
matrix. A couple of ChebConv layers having 256 channels and
Dropout layers are applied to the waveform data, followed by
a GCSConv layer with 256 channels. This approach enables
the model to encode the complex spatiotemporal relationships
present in the seismic data, an advantage over conventional
Convolutional Neural Networks that might miss such intricate
correlations. We express the operation of the GNN block
mathematically by
Gi = fGNN(Fi, A);
∀i ∈{1, 2, ...., N},
(4)
where Gi denotes the output of the GNN block corresponding
to the input CNN feature vector Fi, the adjacency matrix A,
and the graph convolutional and pooling operations, fGNN(.),
performed by the GNN block of SC-GNN.
To gain a deeper understanding of the GNN block in our
proposed SC-GNN model, we need to elaborate on the distinct
GNN layers utilized - ChebConv (Chebyshev Convolution)
and GCSConv (Graph Skip Convolution).
• ChebConv: The ChebConv layer in a GNN employs
Chebyshev polynomials to approximate the spectral filter
derived from GNN [45]. This facilitates the execution of
convolution operations over the graph structure, thereby
encapsulating both local and non-local information.
• GCSConv: The GCSConv layer, an evolved variant of the
GCN layer with trainable skip connections, enhances the
local structure and feature diffusion [46]. It accomplishes
this by amalgamating spectral diffusion, which focuses
on the graph’s global structure, akin to ChebConv, and
spatial diffusion, which emphasizes each node’s local
neighbourhood structure.
The intuition behind using two ChebConv layers followed
by GCSConv is to initially capture global graph features
via the ChebConv layers, subsequently refining these fea-
tures by considering local neighborhood information using the
GCSConv layer. This strategy is designed to be especially
beneficial in regression tasks such as intensity prediction,
where precision is paramount. It potentially harnesses both
the global and local graph structures to generate more accurate
predictions. The dual usage of ChebConv and GCSConv layers
fosters a more comprehensive representation of the graph as
they may capture disparate features.
4) Embedding Layer: The data exits the GNN block and
enters the Embedding Layer, where a GlobalAttentionPool
layer [47] with five channels is used. This layer aids the
model in focusing on the most informative parts of the graph
concerning the prediction task [48]. Along with the attention
mechanism, the data passes another Dense layer having 100
neurons. Here, the model generates the final embeddings
by concatenating the GlobalAttentionPool and Dense layers’
outputs, encapsulating each earthquake’s distinct seismic char-
acteristics. Mathematically, we can represent this embedding
generation as
Embi = femb(Gi);
∀i ∈{1, 2, ...., N},
(5)
where Embi denotes the embeddings for the i-th station
with length DE = 32 and femb(.) indicates the embedding
generation operation performed by the embedding layer of SC-
GNN.
5) Contrastive Head: In the final stage of the SC-GNN
architecture, the Projection Network employs a multi-layer
perceptron (MLP) to project the seismic embeddings into a
lower dimensional space. These embeddings essentially are
feature representations of a snapshot of seismic wavefield
across the seismic network. Using a series of Dense layers,
supplemented with Dropout (rate = 0.05) and Batch Normal-
ization for stability and regularization, the network projects the
embeddings into a space conducive to the contrastive learning
objective. Similar earthquakes are positioned close together in
this space, and dissimilar ones are spread apart. The projection
operation can be expressed as
zi = P(Embi);
∀i ∈{1, 2, ...., N},
(6)
where zi denotes the embedding projection for the i-th station
embedding with length Dp = 10 and P(.) represents the
projection operation executed by the projection head of SC-
GNN. Now, the embedding project vector, z, which is used

--- Sayfa 8 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. XX, NO. X, FEBRUARY 2024
8
directly in the contrastive loss function, is given by
z =


z1
z2
...
zN

.
(7)
Note that our model architecture’s contrastive head is dis-
posable. Its main purpose is to generate projection embeddings
for self-supervised contrastive loss calculations. As a result, it
plays a crucial role in the hybrid contrastive training phase.
Afterward, it is removed from the subsequent stages of im-
plementation as contrastive loss calculations are not required
for the goal of prediction. The self-supervised contrastive loss
function [49], Lcont, applied at this stage is given by
Lcont =
X
m∈M
Lcont
m
= −
X
m∈M
log
exp(zm · zm′/τ)
P
a∈A(m)
exp(zm · za/τ)
.
(8)
where, M = {1, 2, . . . M}, represents a training batch with all
the odd samples being original samples and the adjacent even
samples corresponding to their respective augmented samples,
together forming a positive pair. For each sample m ∈M and
its corresponding positive sample m′ ∈M, A(m) = M\m. z
denotes the Dp dimensional projection of the DE dimensional
representation, and τ is the temperature parameter, adjusting
the sensitivity of the loss function to the similarity between
samples. The augmentation we perform here is unique. Instead
of the typical 1D signal augmentations such as noise injection,
scaling, time-shifting, time-scaling, frequency shifting, etc., we
clip and zero-pad the original signal to generate the augmented
signal as shown in Figure 3. We elaborate more on this
augmentation technique in the next sub-section (IV-C).
In parallel with the contrastive loss, we also apply another
regression loss to ensure that the generated embeddings are
task-specific, i.e., specifically oriented toward accurate inten-
sity prediction. While the contrastive loss is applied to the
outputs of the contrastive head, this regression loss [50] is
applied to the outputs of the prediction head. This regression
loss is given by
Lreg = w1 × (1 −r2) + w2 × LHL + w3 × ϵ2 + w4 × |ϵ|
+w5 × La
HL,
(9)
where LHL denotes the well-known HL value, LHL is a mod-
ified asymmetric version of the Huber-loss, r represents the
Pearson correlation coefficient, ϵ is the error in the prediction,
and w1, w2, w3, w4 and w5 are the weights applied to the
correlation loss, HL, MSE, MAE and the asymmetric HL,
respectively. The exact values used for w1, w2, w3, w4 and
w5 are determined to be 0.002, 1.0, 0.0096, 0.002 and 0.0032,
respectively, through extensive trial and error to suit the
required task best. The Lreg function is a custom loss function
that combines elements of Huber loss (HL) and correlation
loss. The HL component is less sensitive to outliers in the
data, providing a more stable training process. In contrast, the
correlation component ensures the predicted seismic intensities
are closely aligned with the actual values. Notably, none of the
well-known regression losses (i.e., MSE, MAE, mean absolute
percentage error, etc.) except HL solely performed as well in
our experiments.
The Lhyb function is a hybrid of the Lcont and Lreg func-
tions, comprehensively evaluating the model’s performance
during the contrastive training stage. It is a straightforward
sum of Lcont and Lreg, i.e, Lhyb = Lcont + Lreg.
Following the conclusion of the hybrid contrastive training
phase, the contrastive head is removed as it serves no further
purpose for the prediction stage. Specifically, the contrastive
head is omitted during the regression training phase (fine-
tuning) and subsequent inference tasks. This is due to the
different requirements of these subsequent phases, which do
not involve calculating contrastive loss and, therefore, do not
need the projection embeddings generated by the contrastive
head. Therefore, while the contrastive head is crucial for
the initial self-supervised learning and embedding generation
during the hybrid contrastive training phase, its functionality is
deliberately limited to this stage, underscoring the disposable
nature of this module within our model’s architecture.
6) Output Block (Prediction Head): After passing through
the embedding layer, the processed data reaches the Output
Block. In this block, the model generates the final predictions
and embeddings. The SC-GNN model generates two forms of
output: seismic intensity predictions at various seismic stations
and seismic embeddings. The intensity predictions, produced
by a sequence of Dense layers and a ’relu’ activation function,
represent the potential earthquake intensities at different seis-
mic stations. On the other hand, the seismic embeddings are
produced through another sequence of Dense layers, capturing
the distinct characteristics of each earthquake.
This two-fold output serves multiple purposes. On the one
hand, it aids in understanding the specifics of an earthquake’s
characteristics by inspecting the embeddings. On the other
hand, it allows for predicting seismic intensities at various
stations, a critical component for effective earthquake early
warning systems. Mathematically, the seismic intensity pre-
dictions can be expressed as
Ii = fout(Embi);
∀i ∈{1, 2, ...., N},
(10)
where Ii denotes the seismic intensity for the i-th station and
fout(.) represents the operation executed by the output block
of SC-GNN. In the prediction head, we utilize the Lreg loss
function to train the generated intensity predictions.
The SC-GNN architecture, with its dedicated functional
blocks, successfully extracts, refines, and leverages seismic
data to generate precise seismic intensity predictions. The
individual blocks, each with its unique functionality, work
together seamlessly, creating a robust and efficient model. This
architecture provides an advanced solution for early warning
generation in the realm of earthquake predictions.
C. Training Process of SC-GNN
In this subsection, we provide a detailed overview of the
training and inference procedures of the SC-GNN model. The
SC-GNN model leverages a unique combination of contrastive

--- Sayfa 9 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. XX, NO. X, FEBRUARY 2024
9
(b)
(a)
Fig. 5: TSNE plot displaying seismic event embeddings: (a)
before contrastive training (b) after contrastive training.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Number of Epochs
10-5
10-4
10-3
Value of learning-rate
Plot of learning-rate vs epochs
Contrastive Stage
Regression Stage
Fig. 6: Learning-rate Scheduler used to train SC-GNN.
training and regression to create robust, task-specific embed-
dings. The sub-section is divided into two segments: model
training and inference.
1) Model Training: The training process of the SC-GNN
model unfolds in two primary stages. The initial phase em-
ploys contrastive training with a distinct data augmentation
scheme. Each seismic waveform, denoted as wi(t), undergoes
transformation to produce augmented samples, wa
i (t). The
augmentation procedure involves clipping the original wave-
form to tc seconds, where tc is an integer uniformly selected
from the set {5, 10, 15, 20, 25}, followed by zero-padding
to maintain a consistent input length of 30 seconds1. This
process yields five augmented samples per original waveform.
Selecting distinct window-length inputs from the same seismic
event forms positive pairs, while waveform data from disparate
events generate negative pairs.
This contrastive learning phase employs a novel hybrid
loss function, Lhyb, combining both contrastive and regres-
sion losses. This approach aims to direct the generation of
task-specific embeddings for seismic intensity prediction. The
model is trained under this hybrid loss function for the first 100
epochs. The seismic embeddings generated during the training
13000 samples at a fixed sampling frequency of 100 Hz
phase are exemplified by the TSNE plot depicted in Fig. 5.
The plot showcases embeddings for ten distinct seismic events,
labeled 1 through 10, alongside their respective augmented
samples with varying input window lengths before (Fig. 5 (a))
and after the contrastive training stage (Fig. 5 (b)). Notably,
the embeddings of augmented samples belonging to the same
seismic event but with different window lengths (5, 10, 15, 20,
25, and 30s) are clustered together after the contrastive training
phase, indicating that the model has successfully learned to
generate similar embeddings for augmented samples from the
same event. Furthermore, distinct seismic events form separate
unique groups, illustrating the model’s ability to differentiate
between individual events. It is important to mention that each
distinct earthquake is represented by a unique color in Fig. 5,
while augmented samples belonging to the same event are
depicted in the same color.
The second training phase centers on fine-tuning the model
for seismic intensity prediction at various geographical loca-
tions using the input earthquake data. This is approached as
a regression task, with the majority of the model layers being
frozen, preserving the integrity of the embeddings learned
during the contrastive training phase. The regression training
is guided solely by the regression loss function Lreg, and it
continues for an additional 100 epochs.
The training process employs the Adam optimizer, owing
to its efficient handling of large-scale data. An exponential
decay learning rate scheduler, as illustrated in Fig. 6, assists
in stabilizing the training process over a total of 200 epochs.
The batch size is set at 32, balancing adequate learning and
manageable computational requirements. The model’s best-
performing weights during the training process are captured
using checkpoints to ensure that the optimal model config-
uration is preserved. Algorithm 2 concisely presents the SC-
GNN training steps. Like every DL-based model, our method’s
generalizability depends on the training data. Retraining the
model is not needed if the test dataset includes a few new
stations adjacent to the training data. For a test set from
a different region, the model would benefit from transfer
learning or a fresh training cycle.
2) Model Inference: Upon completing the model training,
we progress to the inference stage. Any window length of
input seismic waveforms for model inference is accepted,
provided they are zero-padded to comply with the fixed input
size. Additionally, the corresponding adjacency matrix must
also be inputted. The model outputs seismic intensities at
all geographic points contained within the adjacency matrix.
This functionality empowers the model to generate real-time,
reliable seismic intensity predictions.
Along with the intensity predictions, the SC-GNN also
produces the embedding vector, Emb, that represents the
entire seismic event or earthquake, and it is given by
Emb =


Emb1
Emb2
...
EmbN

.
(11)
Without the loss of generality, though the above embedding

--- Sayfa 10 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. XX, NO. X, FEBRUARY 2024
10
Algorithm 2 Training Process of the SC-GNN
Require: Training data: Waveforms, Inter-station Distances,
Shakemap Labels of Intensities
Ensure: Predicted intensities at all stations
1: Convert all PGA values to intensity using the EMS con-
version equation using 12
2: Impute all missing waveforms with zeroes
3: Generate augmented samples by clipping and zero-
padding the waveforms
4: Prepare the adjacency matrix using inter-station distances
5: Segment the data into training, validation, and test sets for
cross-fold validation
6: Train the SC-GNN model for 100 epochs using Lhyb
7: Freeze all layers up to the embedding layer and discard
the contrastive head
8: Load the best model weights based on the validation
metric, Mval = Lcont
val + 100 × Lreg
val
9: Train the model for another 100 epochs using Lreg
10: Load the best model weights based on the validation
metric, which is the same as the validation loss Lreg
val
11: Pass the test data for inference, i.e., intensity prediction
vector is applied for our intensity prediction task, it can
potentially be used to predict various other seismic parameters.
V. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
In this section, we assess the performance of our pro-
posed SC-GNN model for real-time seismic intensity pre-
diction using three real-world seismic datasets. Additionally,
we compare the effectiveness of our proposed model against
several state-of-the-art baseline models by examining standard
performance metrics.
A. Environment
The proposed model is implemented using Python, Tensor-
flow 2.12, and Keras 2.12. The GNN layers are imported from
Spektral 1.2.0. Numpy is utilized for calculations, and some
figures are generated using MATLAB 2022b. The model is
trained on Google Colab Pro+ with 83.5 GB system RAM,
166.8 GB disk space, and an NVIDIA A100-SXM4-40GB
GPU to expedite the training process. Following training, the
model’s size is compact (approximately 2.8 MB), allowing
deployment on standard PC hardware and edge computing
platforms. Notably, the baseline model simulations are con-
ducted using the same configuration for a fair comparison.
B. Data Description
We use the following three widely used datasets to demon-
strate the prediction performance of our proposed algorithm.
1) Central Italy (CI) Dataset: As delineated in [51], this
dataset draws upon three-component waveforms from 915
earthquake events captured by an extensive network of 39 sta-
tions across Central Italy. It comprises three distinct channels
of waveforms: HN, HH, and EH. The EH channels harbor
waveforms at a 100 Hz or 125 Hz sampling rate, while
the HH and HN channels exclusively accommodate 100 Hz
waveforms. However, all the waveforms are resampled to a
fixed uniform sampling rate of 100 Hz in the finalized dataset.
To employ this dataset for early warning analysis, it is
essential to identify the p-waves using Phasenet [52]. Phasenet
is designed to process time-series seismic data and categorize
them into P-wave, S-wave, and noise. This necessitates the
modification of waveform sampling rates that deviate from 100
Hz, ensuring a uniform rate throughout. Furthermore, Phasenet
requires waveforms of equal length. After discerning the
longest waveform length to be 10310, shorter waveforms are
extended to match this length via zero padding. Based on two
criteria—capturing time of p-picks and phase score—Phasenet
makes p-wave pick predictions.
The input dataset is generated by extracting the first 30 sec-
onds of all waveforms, starting from the respective earthquake
origin times. For earthquakes with magnitudes (M) below 4,
HH and EH channels are employed, while HN channels are
utilized for earthquakes with M greater than or equal to 4. The
ground truth is generated using the peak ground acceleration
(PGA), which is then converted to intensity through the ground
motion-to-intensity conversion equation (GMICE) described
later. Instances, where waveform data for specific earthquakes
are absent from some stations, are addressed by zero-filling.
The ground truth in those cases is imputed by utilizing USGS
shakemap version 4.1 [53].
Due to the availability of a higher number of seismic events
and waveforms, we choose this CI dataset as our primary
dataset. Unless otherwise mentioned, the experimental results
presented in the subsequent discussions are generated using
this dataset.
2) Central Western Italy (CW) dataset: This dataset con-
sists of 3-component waveforms of 266 earthquakes from
central western Italy recorded by 39 stations. It is thoroughly
described in [54], and the prepared dataset can be found in
[55]. Similar to the CI dataset, intensity labels are generated
by converting the PGA values to intensity using the GMICE.
It is important to note that all the waveforms available for
the CW dataset are of length 10s. Hence, the value of tc for
augmented sample generation during the contrastive training
is confined to the set {5, 6, 7, 8, 9}, and the input length is
1000 samples at a fixed sampling frequency of 100 Hz.
3) STEAD (STanford EArthquake Dataset): The STEAD
[56], [57] serves as our third dataset for this study. Specifically,
we focus on the region of California, limited within the
geographical coordinates of latitude 32.5° to 35° and longitude
-115° to -118°, as this area encompasses the majority of
earthquakes documented in the dataset. Within California, we
identified 191 earthquakes that a union of 194 seismic stations
recorded. Each station’s recordings consist of 3-component
seismograms, with each component spanning 1 minute. The
instrument responses associated with the stations, obtained
from the Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
(IRIS) [58], were acquired and converted into acceleration
units [56]. However, we extract the initial 30 seconds from
each waveform to generate the final input dataset, following
the same approach applied to the CI dataset.

--- Sayfa 11 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. XX, NO. X, FEBRUARY 2024
11
To impute the missing PGA values in stations where wave-
form data are unavailable, USGS shakemap version 4.1 [53]
is used to make PGA prediction with the help of instructions
from shakemap manual [59]. Using Shakemap, we generate
XML grids of interpolated ground shaking data for each
earthquake. XML grid consists of thousands of location-
specific data fields around the earthquake’s epicenter spaced
at 0.0055° ∼0.0167° intervals of latitude and longitude. Each
field contains PGA, PGV, MMI, and other attributes of a
particular location. The process of installation and grid file
generation using Shakemap is described in videos given in
the online repository. The PGA values of the 194 stations
are obtained from the field having the nearest latitude and
longitude from each station. Again, we convert the PGA values
to intensity using GMICE.
The key attributes of the datasets are shown in Table I.
Properties
CI
CW
STEAD
(California)
Earthquakes
915
266
191
Stations
39
39
194
Available
Waveforms
33175
9856
4299
Magnitudes
(M)
2.9 ≤M ≤
6.5
2.9 ≤M ≤
5.1
1.7 ≤M ≤
5.42
Mean of M
3.32
3.29
2.91
PGA
(cm/s2)
0 ≤M ≤
0.49
0 ≤M ≤
0.029
0 ≤M ≤
0.015
PGA
Mean(cm/s2)
0.013
0.0014
0.0019
Periods
1-1-16 to 29-
11-16
1-1-13 to 20-
11-17
19-2-10 to 9-
4-18
TABLE I: Comparison of the Datasets
C. Ground Motion to Intensity Conversion
The implications of an earthquake at a specific site de-
mand the determination of intensity value at that locale. The
previously employed Ground Motion Prediction Equations
(GMPEs) yield PGA values, necessitating a conversion into
intensity. For this transformation, we utilize the Ground Mo-
tion to Intensity Conversion Equation (GMICE) proposed by
Zanini et al. [60].
This equation generates intensity values following the Eu-
ropean Macroseismic Scale (EMS-98), originating from re-
gression analysis of Italian seismic data collected from the
Parametric Catalogue of Italian Earthquakes and ITACA. The
equation is as follows:
IEMS-98 = 2.03 + 2.28 log(PGA(cm/s2)).
(12)
It is important to observe that Equation 12 was specifically
designed to operate within the range 2 ≤IEMS-98 ≤9.5. Con-
sequently, any values resulting from this equation are confined
within this predefined range to ensure validity. Specifically, if
a conversion using this equation results in an IEMS-98 value less
than 2, the value is elevated to meet the minimum threshold
of 2. This procedure is conducted to adhere to the stipulated
constraints of the GMICE described by Equation 12.
D. Baseline Models
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed approach,
we have compared the performance of our proposed SC-
GNN with some state-of-the-art models for seismic intensity
prediction. These models, along with their adopted parameter
settings, are described below:
1) GMPE
[61],
[62]:
The
first
baseline
model
is
regression-based ground motion prediction equations (GMPE),
considering the latest release of the strong motion database.
These predict PGA, peak ground velocity (PGV), and 5%-
damped spectral acceleration over a magnitude range of 4-
6.9 and distances up to 200 km. The total standard deviation
confirms the large variability of ground shaking parameters
for regional datasets containing small to moderate-magnitude
events. This model is an update of the ITA08 GMPE [63],
considering improved data, reprocessing, and an extended
distance range.
For comparison purposes with our proposed SC-GNN, in
the case of the CI and CW dataset, the prediction of PGA
values is achieved via the GMPE, as formulated by Bindi
et al. [61]. This equation, deriving from the Italian strong
motion database, ”Italian Accelerometric Archive” (ITACA),
necessitates magnitude, station distance, and soil site class
as inputs. Ideally, the GMPE utilizes the Joyner-Boore dis-
tance (RJB); however, the lack of fault geometric details in
this instance compels us to substitute it with the epicentral
distance—a deviation acceptable within the purview of this
equation. Identification of local site classes at respective sta-
tion locations is carried out using the standalone software Soil
Class-Italy (SSC-Italy). This software applies the Eurocode 8
soil classification developed by Forte et al. [64].
For STEAD, PGA values at the station locations for each
earthquake are predicted using GMPE given by Boore et
al. [62]. This GMPE is developed using the NGA-West2
ground motion database provided by the Pacific Earthquake
Engineering Research Center (PEER). This equation requires
magnitude, distance of the site, and local site effects in
terms of shear wave velocity (Vs30). Similar to the CI and
CW datasets, we have used epicentral distance instead of
Joyner–Boore distance (RJB). For identifying the Vs30 value
at the location of the stations, we have used the Global
Vs30 grid file, which is made available by the United States
Geological Survey (USGS) based on the works of Heath et
al. [65]. The final location coordinates and magnitudes, as
documented in the datasets, were employed for applying the
GMPEs to all three datasets.
2) CNN Based Model [19]: The second baseline model
is a deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) designed
to predict earthquake ground shaking intensity measurements
using multistation 3C acceleration waveforms. The input data
consists of normalized waveform data from various seismic
stations, and the model does not require prior knowledge of
the earthquake source. The CNN architecture is adapted from
Kriegerowski et al. [66] and consists of three convolutional
layers followed by fully connected layers. The first two
convolutional layers learn temporal patterns station-by-station,
while the third layer gathers cross-station information. The
model has been tested on raw data without data pre-selection

--- Sayfa 12 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. XX, NO. X, FEBRUARY 2024
12
and has shown stability and accurate prediction of ground
shaking intensity. The technique is not designed for earthquake
early warning but provides useful estimates of ground motions
within 15-20 seconds after the earthquake origin time.
3) GCN Based Model [21]: Recently, a Graph Convolu-
tional Network (GCN) based approach, named TISER-GCN,
has been proposed for multi-variate time-series regression
that achieves state-of-the-art performance. It predicts ground-
shaking intensity at seismic stations using a regression ap-
proach. The model utilizes two 1D CNN layers with wide
kernel sizes, small strides, increasing filters, and ReLU acti-
vation functions to learn the temporal patterns of each station.
After feature extraction, the model combines node features
(latitude, longitude) with partially flattened feature vectors
to create input for the Graph Convolutional Network (GCN)
layers. The GCN layers reduce the dimensions of the input and
handle cross-station information. In contrast to standard graph
pooling techniques, this model uses a flattened output from the
final GCN layer to preserve meaningful features. The archi-
tecture concludes with a dense layer and five linear activations
function-based dense layers that predict target variables such
as PGA, PGV, etc. Here, we only utilize the PGA output to
calculate the seismic intensity using the GMICE.
E. Performance Metrics
We have used a range of performance metrics to evaluate
and compare the effectiveness of the proposed model with the
baseline models.
Mean Squared Error (MSE): MSE measures the average
squared difference between the predicted and actual values. It
is widely used in regression problems to quantify the error in
predictions. A lower MSE indicates better model performance,
with zero being the ideal value.
Standard Deviation (SD): The standard deviation (SD)
of the error represents the residuals’ dispersion around the
mean. It helps in understanding the variability of the model’s
predictions. A lower SD indicates that the model’s predictions
are more consistent and reliable.
Correlation Coefficient and R2: The correlation coeffi-
cient (CC) measures the strength and direction of the relation-
ship between the predicted and actual values. A value close to
1 (100%) indicates a strong positive correlation, while a value
close to 0 represents no correlation at all. A high CC signifies
that the model’s predictions align with the actual values. The
R2 or the Coefficient of Determination is the square of the
CC that measures how well the model’s predictions explain
the variance in the actual values.
Additionally, conditional scatter plots and Bland-Altman
plots are used to assess the models’ performance, biases,
and generalization capabilities. By using these metrics, we
thoroughly assess the effectiveness of the proposed model and
compare it with the baseline models, considering various as-
pects such as prediction accuracy, consistency, and reliability.
F. Comparison with Baseline Models
1) Performance Comparison with Baselines: In this sec-
tion, we compare the performance of the proposed SC-GNN
Metric/Model
SC-GNN
TISER-GCN
CNN
GMPE
MSE
0.4172
0.9645
1.4027
1.3507
SD
0.6110
0.9005
0.9701
1.0979
CC
83.94%
61.34%
48.42%
43.11%
R2
70.46%
37.63%
23.44%
18.58%
TABLE II: Comparison of the proposed SC-GNN model with
baseline models on the CI dataset for 2 < IEMS-98 < 9.5.
model with the baseline models: TISER-GCN, CNN, and
GMPE, on our primary dataset with a 10s input window. The
results are presented in Table II.
The proposed model, SC-GNN, outperforms the baseline
models across all metrics in the CI dataset. Our SC-GNN
model achieves the lowest MSE of 0.4172, which reflects
around 234% improvement over the state-of-the-art best-
forming TISER-GCN model, indicating more accurate pre-
dictions. The SD of the error for the GNN model is the
lowest at 0.6111, suggesting more consistent and reliable
predictions than the other models. Furthermore, the SC-GNN
model has the highest CC of 83.94%, signifying a strong
positive relationship between the predicted and actual values.
The significant improvement in performance metrics for our
SC-GNN model can be attributed to its ability to capture
intricate spatial and temporal patterns inherent in earthquake
data by utilizing sophisticated GNN layers. Specifically, the
ChebConv and GCSConv layers integrated within the SC-
GNN effectively capture both local and non-local information
encoded within the seismic graph, allowing the model to
better understand the underlying structural dynamics of the
data. In addition, the seismic embeddings generated during
the self-supervised contrastive training phase acquire key traits
ingrained in the extended seismic waveforms. This leads to
more accurate and reliable predictions. In contrast, the baseline
models may struggle to capture these relationships due to
their respective limitations in handling the data’s spatial and
temporal aspects and lack of any contrastive learning phase.
2) The Effect of Varying Time Window: In this section, we
compare the performance of the proposed SC-GNN model
with the baseline TISER-GCN and CNN models on the CI
dataset when varying the input time windows from 5 seconds
to 10 seconds. The results are presented in Table III.
Time-Window
Proposed SC-GNN
TISER-GCN
CNN
10s
0.1137
0.2467
0.3593
9s
0.1234
0.2619
0.3771
8s
0.1406
0.2796
0.3988
7s
0.1523
0.2968
0.4215
6s
0.1608
0.3217
0.4503
5s
0.1723
0.3604
0.4982
TABLE III: MSE Comparison of the proposed SC-GNN model
with baseline models on the CI dataset with varying input time
windows.
As the input time window is reduced, the performance of
all models degrades, indicated by an increase in the MSE.
However, the proposed SC-GNN model consistently outper-
forms the baseline TISER-GCN and CNN models across all
input time windows. The SC-GNN model maintains a signif-
icantly lower MSE compared to the baselines, demonstrating

--- Sayfa 13 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. XX, NO. X, FEBRUARY 2024
13
its robustness and effectiveness in handling varying input
sizes. Furthermore, the deterioration in the performance of the
baseline models occurs much faster compared to our proposed
SC-GNN when the input time window is shortened. Notably,
even when using a 5s window input, the SC-GNN model
demonstrates a remarkable 143% improvement in performance
compared to the next best-performing model, TISER-GCN,
with a 10s input window.
3) Conditional Plots: We have generated conditional scat-
ter plots to better understand the performance of our SC-
GNN model and the baseline models (TISER-GCN and CNN)
concerning earthquakes’ magnitude and depth. Conditional
scatter plots based on the depth and magnitude of earthquakes
help visualize the model’s performance concerning earthquake
depth and magnitude. By analyzing the plot, we can un-
derstand how well the model performs for different ranges
of depth and magnitude, identify any potential biases, and
assess the model’s generalization capabilities. Fig. 7 (a,c,e)
presents the magnitude-based conditional scatter plots for the
proposed SC-GNN and baseline models. For the proposed SC-
GNN model (Fig. 7a), the regression lines for all magnitude
ranges (3-3.5, 3.5-4.5, and greater than 4.5) almost overlap
with each other, indicating that the predictions are unbiased
with respect to the earthquakes’ magnitudes. The regression
lines are also quite close to the ideal regression diagonal
line, suggesting good prediction accuracy across all magnitude
ranges. It is imperative to stress that the intervals depicted
in the conditional plot are derived from earthquake moment
magnitudes, while the ground truth and our predictions are
measured on an intensity scale.
In contrast, the baseline TISER-GCN model (Fig. 7c) and
CNN model (Figure 7e) exhibit regression lines that do not
overlap for all magnitude ranges, revealing biases in the pre-
dictions. Both models show much higher error for earthquakes
with magnitudes greater than 4.5, with the regression lines
being far from the ideal diagonal line. This indicates that the
baseline models struggle to predict ground motion intensities
for larger earthquakes accurately.
Fig. 7(b,d,f) illustrates the depth-based conditional scatter
plots for the proposed SC-GNN and baseline models. For
the proposed SC-GNN model (Fig. 7b), the regression lines
for all depth ranges (1-8 km, 8-10 km, and greater than
10 km) almost overlap with each other, signifying that the
predictions are unbiased with respect to the earthquakes’
depths. The regression lines are also quite close to the ideal
regression diagonal line, demonstrating accurate predictions
across various depths.
However, the baseline TISER-GCN model (Fig. 7d) and
CNN model (Fig. 7f) exhibit regression lines that do not over-
lap for all depth ranges, highlighting biases in the predictions.
Both models show much higher error for earthquakes with
lower depths, with the regression lines being far from the
ideal diagonal line. This implies that the baseline models have
difficulty accurately predicting ground motion intensities for
shallow earthquakes.
In summary, the proposed SC-GNN model outperforms the
baseline models in terms of unbiased predictions and accuracy
across different magnitude and depth ranges. These results
further demonstrate the superiority of the SC-GNN model for
ground motion intensity prediction.
4) Bland-Altman Plots: The Bland-Altman plots provide
a useful visualization to assess the agreement between two
different measurement techniques. In this case, we are compar-
ing the predictions from the SC-GNN model and the baseline
models (TISER-GCN and CNN) against the true observed
earthquake intensities from the seismic waveforms. The main
components of a Bland-Altman plot are the mean difference
(bias) and the limits of agreement (LoA), which provide an
estimate of the range within which 95% of the differences
between the two measurements lie. The plots display the
difference between the two methods against their average,
allowing the identification of systematic biases, outliers, and
trends in the differences. It aids in evaluating the model’s
consistency with respect to the actual observed intensity.
For the proposed SC-GNN model (Fig. 8a), the Bland-
Altman plot shows a mean difference of 0.40 and LoA of [-
0.79, 1.60]. This indicates that the SC-GNN model predictions
are, on average, in good agreement with the true observed
intensities. The narrow range of the LoA suggests that the
model’s performance is consistent across the range of earth-
quake intensities.
In contrast, the baseline TISER-GCN model (Fig. 8b)
presents a mean difference of 0.67 and LoA of [-1.09, 2.43].
The increased mean difference compared to the SC-GNN
model suggests that the TISER-GCN model predictions are
less accurate. Additionally, the wider LoA indicates a higher
level of variability in the model’s performance.
For the baseline CNN model (Fig. 8c), the mean difference
is 0.82, and the LoA are [-1.08, 2.72]. This result shows
that the CNN model has the highest bias among the three
models, with its predictions deviating significantly from the
true observed intensities. The LoA is also wider than those
for the SC-GNN and TISER-GCN models, suggesting a much
greater level of variability in the performance of the CNN
model.
In summary, the Bland-Altman plots demonstrate the supe-
rior performance of the proposed SC-GNN model in predicting
earthquake intensities compared to the baseline TISER-GCN
and CNN models. The GNN model exhibits the smallest
mean difference and the narrowest LoA, indicating higher
accuracy and consistency in its predictions across the range
of earthquake intensities. This analysis further supports the
effectiveness of the proposed SC-GNN model for predicting
earthquake intensities.
Metric/Model
Proposed SC-GNN
TISER-GCN
CNN
GMPE
MSE
0.5326
1.1664
1.7914
0.5765
SD
0.6858
1.0163
0.9305
0.7539
CC
70.07%
29.28%
16.94%
65.91%
R2
49.10%
8.57%
2.87%
43.44%
TABLE IV: Comparison of the proposed SC-GNN model with
baseline models on the CW dataset for 2 < IEMS-98 < 9.5.
5) Performance Comparison on Secondary Datasets: In
this discourse, we assess the performance of our proposed
SC-GNN model on secondary datasets (CW and STEAD),

--- Sayfa 14 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. XX, NO. X, FEBRUARY 2024
14
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Ground Truths
2
4
6
8
Predictions
Conditional Plot Based on Earthquake Magnitude
Legend
Perfect Diagonal
Magnitude Range
3-3.5
3.5-4.5
>4.5
(a) Proposed SC-GNN Model (Magnitude).
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Ground Truths
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Predictions
Conditional Plot Based on Earthquake Depth
Legend
Perfect Diagonal
Depth Range
1-8
8-10
>10
(b) Proposed SC-GNN Model (Depth).
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Ground Truths
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Predictions
Conditional Plot Based on Earthquake Magnitude
Legend
Perfect Diagonal
Magnitude Range
3-3.5
3.5-4.5
>4.5
(c) Baseline TISER-GCN Model (Magnitude).
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Ground Truths
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Predictions
Conditional Plot Based on Earthquake Depth
Legend
Perfect Diagonal
Depth Range
1-8
8-10
>10
(d) Baseline TISER-GCN Model (Depth).
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Ground Truths
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Predictions
Conditional Plot Based on Earthquake Magnitude
Legend
Perfect Diagonal
Magnitude Range
3-3.5
3.5-4.5
>4.5
(e) Baseline CNN Model (Magnitude).
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Ground Truths
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Predictions
Conditional Plot Based on Earthquake Depth
Legend
Perfect Diagonal
Depth Range
1-8
8-10
>10
(f) Baseline CNN Model (Depth).
Fig. 7: Conditional Scatter Plots: Magnitude-based (a,c,e) and Depth-based (b,d,f).
Metric/Model
Proposed SC-GNN
TISER-GCN
CNN
GMPE
MSE
0.8959
1.2196
1.5277
0.3512
SD
0.8295
0.9379
0.8682
0.5881
CC
40.68%
14.07%
13.66%
77.25%
R2
16.55%
1.98%
1.87%
59.68%
TABLE V: Comparison of the proposed SC-GNN model with
baseline models on the STEAD dataset for 2 < IEMS-98 < 9.5.
comparing it to baseline models: TISER-GCN, CNN, and
GMPE. Performance is gauged using MSE, SD, and CC.
In the evaluation on the CW dataset (Table IV), the SC-
GNN model demonstrates superior performance compared to
the TISER-GCN and CNN models, as evidenced by lower
MSE, SD, and higher CC. It also slightly outperforms the
GMPE. It is worth noting that the CW dataset is smaller in
size than CI in terms of the number of events and available
waveform data, which leads to a decrease in the performance
of all DL-based models.
In the case of the STEAD dataset (Table V), the SC-
GNN model exhibits significant improvements over all the
baseline models except for the GMPE. This is reflected in
lower MSE, lower SD, and higher CC values. However, it is
important to mention that the STEAD dataset comprises only
4299 waveform data points, accounting for a mere 11.60%

--- Sayfa 15 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. XX, NO. X, FEBRUARY 2024
15
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Mean of two measures
2
0
2
4
6
Difference of two measures
 Mean: 0.40293 
 LoA: [-0.79483, 1.60070]
(a) Proposed SC-GNN Model
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Mean of two measures
4
2
0
2
4
6
Difference of two measures
 Mean: 0.67170 
 LoA: [-1.09339, 2.43681]
(b) Baseline TISER-GCN Model
2
3
4
5
6
Mean of two measures
2
0
2
4
6
Difference of two measures
 Mean: 0.82039 
 LoA: [-1.08113, 2.72192]
(c) Baseline CNN Model
Fig. 8: Bland-Altman plots displaying the mean difference and
LOA of observed and predicted values.
of the possible 37054 waveforms (191 × 194). Consequently,
the limited data availability poses challenges for these data-
driven DL models, including the proposed SC-GNN, whereas
the GMPE remains relatively unaffected. Nonetheless, the SC-
GNN model showcases comparatively better resilience and
predictive capabilities on this challenging STEAD dataset, fur-
ther affirming its effectiveness in earthquake ground shaking
intensity prediction.
6) Comparison of Model Parameters:
We carry out a
detailed analysis of the number of parameters utilized by our
proposed SC-GNN and compare this to the parameter count
of two other baseline models: the TISER-GCN and the CNN.
A summary of these comparisons is presented in Table VI.
As we observe, our proposed SC-GNN model utilizes fewer
parameters, approximately 0.705 million, and consequently, its
overall model size is 2.8 MB. In contrast, both the TISER-
GCN and CNN models require almost twice as many param-
eters, around 1.26 and 1.35 million, respectively, and larger
Model
Parameters (Millions)
Model Size (MB)
Proposed SC-GNN
0.705
2.8
TISER-GCN
1.26
4.8
CNN
1.35
5.1
TABLE VI: Comparison of model parameters and model sizes.
model sizes of 4.8 and 5.1 MB.
The significance of these findings becomes even more
pronounced in the context of early warning systems for seismic
activities. A lower number of parameters directly implies a
more efficient model in terms of computational resources and
thus faster computations, which is a critical factor in timely
predicting seismic activities and issuing early warnings.
Furthermore, the reduced model size of the SC-GNN makes
it a more suitable choice for implementation on resource-
constrained devices. This characteristic is critical, as seismic
early warning systems often operate on field-deployed devices
with limited computational power and storage capacity.
These factors underscore the suitability of SC-GNN over
the TISER-GCN and CNN models in the context of seismic
activity prediction. They also validate the design choices in
developing the SC-GNN, emphasizing its efficient utilization
of parameters without sacrificing prediction performance, as
evidenced in the earlier discussions of model accuracy and
performance on varying input window lengths.
G. Ablation Study
1) Model Variations: In this section, we present the results
of an ablation study conducted to evaluate the impact of
different combinations of layers in our proposed SC-GNN
model. The final proposed model consists of a combination of
two Chebyshev Conv (ChC), one Graph-skip Conv (GCSC),
and one Graph-Attention Pool (GAP) layer. We experimented
with removing some layers and adding extra layers, such as
the graph convolutional layer (GCN), Diffusion Conv (DC),
and graph attention layer (GAT), to demonstrate that the final
proposed model performs better than other layer combinations.
The results are shown in Table VII.
GNN Layers
MSE
Normalized MSE
ChC + ChC + GCSC + GAP
0.1137
4.83%
ChC + ChC + GCSC
0.1848
7.86%
ChC + ChC + GAT
0.5431
23.11%
ChC + ChC + GCN
0.4337
18.45%
ChC + ChC + DC
0.9372
39.88%
ChC + GCSC + GAP
0.3697
15.73%
TABLE VII: Ablation study results for the proposed SC-GNN
model on the CI dataset.
The results from the ablation study clearly demonstrate that
the final proposed model, which combines ChC, GCSC, and
GAP layers, achieves the lowest MSE (0.1137) and the lowest
normalized MSE (4.83%). This indicates that the combination
of these layers is the most effective in predicting ground
motion intensities. Here, the normalized MSE is obtained by
dividing the raw MSE values by the observed data mean. This
computational step guarantees that the normalized MSE ap-
propriately reflects the relative error, taking into consideration
the data set scale.

--- Sayfa 16 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. XX, NO. X, FEBRUARY 2024
16
The superior performance of the final proposed model can
be attributed to the combined strengths of the ChC, GCSC, and
GAP layers. The ChC layer effectively captures local spatial
information in the graph, while the GCSC layer helps learn
long-range dependencies and skip uninformative features. The
GAP layer, on the other hand, focuses on aggregating the most
relevant information from the graph by attending to the most
important nodes.
By comparing the final proposed model with other layer
combinations, we can infer that removing any of these layers
leads to decreased performance, as evidenced by higher MSE
and normalized MSE values. This confirms that the synergy
between ChC, GCSC, and GAP layers is crucial for achieving
the best performance in our GNN model.
2) Time Window Variation: We evaluated the performance
of the proposed SC-GNN model by varying the input window
length from 5s to 30s. The results of this analysis are presented
in Table VIII.
Time-Window
MSE
SD
CC
30s
0.0844
0.2893
92.86%
25s
0.0880
0.2985
92.46%
20s
0.0969
0.3107
91.89%
15s
0.1030
0.3181
91.38%
10s
0.1137
0.3369
90.09%
5s
0.1723
0.4071
83.29%
TABLE VIII: Performance analysis of the proposed SC-GNN
model with varying input window length
As shown in the table, the performance of the SC-GNN
model deteriorates as the input window length is reduced, with
the MSE increasing and the CC decreasing. The reason for this
deterioration is that shorter windows capture less information
about the seismic waveforms, making it more challenging for
the model to accurately predict ground motion intensities.
Earthquake early warning systems (EEWS) require shorter
window lengths for faster response times, which is crucial
for timely alerts and potentially saving lives and property.
However, as demonstrated in our analysis, there is a trade-off
between window length and prediction accuracy. The shorter
the window length, the less accurate the model becomes.
To achieve an optimal balance between response time and
prediction accuracy for EEWS applications, it is essential to
carefully consider the choice of input window length. Future
research could focus on further optimizing the GNN model or
exploring other approaches that maintain high accuracy while
using shorter input windows.
H. SC-GNN for Early Warning
In this sub-section, we showcase the significant promise and
effectiveness of our proposed model, SC-GNN, as an integral
part of the earthquake early warning (EEW) systems. The
ability of the SC-GNN to deliver rapid and accurate seismic
intensity predictions, even in the critical window of just 5s,
underscores its potential as a pioneering tool for early seismic
warnings. The following discussion contains some key results
using the main CI dataset.
A vital testament to the utility of SC-GNN in EEW is
reflected in the distribution of the P-wave arrival times de-
picted in Fig. 9(a). The histogram reveals that a majority
of the stations, approximately 90%, receive the prediction
before the P-wave arrives 2, considering that our SC-GNN,
a regional EEW system, enables early warning prior to the
arrival of P-waves at stations located at greater distances. It
is important to note that the actual warning time available
to take preparatory measures will also depend on the time
required to disseminate warnings, which can vary based on
infrastructure, technology, and geolocation. Research shows
that, with ideal infrastructure, this transmission time can be
relatively negligible compared to the early detection advantage
provided by SC-GNN [67], [68].
The histogram of the maximum ground shaking times, as
shown in Fig. 9(b), further underscores the benefit of SC-
GNN. As observed, more than 95% of the locations potentially
receive the warning well ahead of the maximum ground
shaking, often the most destructive phase of an earthquake.
This suggests that taking into account practical transmission
times, there might still be a valuable window for the populace
and infrastructure to prepare, potentially mitigating the seismic
event’s impacts.
The cumulative density function (CDF) of the warning
times (Fig. 9(c)) provides an illustrative perspective on the
capabilities of SC-GNN in EEW. The plot suggests that timely
warnings could be disseminated to a significant number of
areas, strengthening the argument for integrating SC-GNN into
EEW systems. We observe that around 70% of the locations
potentially receive a warning time of more than 10s, which,
after accounting for transmission times, might be sufficient for
various precautionary measures like taking cover, shutting off
utilities, evacuation, etc [69]. Here, warning time refers to the
interval between the occurrence of maximum ground shaking
and the moment the warning is received.
Furthermore, the relationship between the warning time and
the epicentral distance (Fig. 9(d)) affirms the effectiveness of
SC-GNN. The warning time proportionally increases with the
distance from the epicenter; for approximately every 4 km,
the warning time is incremented by 1s. This suggests that
areas farther from the epicenter, which traditionally had to
wait longer for the warning will now have more time to brace
for the incoming seismic waves.
In summary, while acknowledging the practical considera-
tions of warning transmission times, our proposed SC-GNN
framework exhibits promising potential for integration into
EEW systems. By leveraging the initial seismic waveforms,
SC-GNN aims to extract critical earthquake information and
generate accurate seismic intensity predictions, contributing
to early warning efforts. It is anticipated that this could
significantly increase the warning lead times in a majority of
areas, providing a valuable cushion of time for implementing
appropriate disaster mitigation measures.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed a novel deep learning
framework, SC-GNN, that comprises two key deep learning
2Here, we assume 5s window input to the SC-GNN.

--- Sayfa 17 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. XX, NO. X, FEBRUARY 2024
17
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 9: SC-GNN for early warning: a) Histogram of p-wave arrival times. b) Histogram of the instant at which maximum
ground shaking occurs. c) Cumulative density function of warning times. d) Plot of warning time with distance from the
epicenter.
components: a GNN for capturing spatiotemporal characteris-
tics of seismic waves in a geographical area, and a contrastive
learning module to find the representation of seismic waves
from a small portion of initial seismic waveforms. More
specifically, the GNN part has a unique ability to propagate
information through the nodes of a graph-like structure of
seismic station distribution, where wave propagation enables
globally informed predictions with locally available data. On
the other hand, the self-supervised contrastive learning phase
enabled us to learn the representation of seismic waveforms
in such a way that facilitates predicting seismic intensity
from a significantly shorter input waveform, which is a key
factor in an EEW system. We have shown in experiments that
the proposed SC-GNN is adaptive to varying input window
lengths, with a commendable performance even at a reduced
window length of 5s. This trait is particularly valuable for
EEW systems, where every second of early warning can mean
the difference between life and death. Our SC-GNN model
outperformed all state-of-the-art methods on three well-known
seismic datasets across multiple assessment measures. Finally,
when potentially integrated into an EEW system, SC-GNN
delivers rapid and accurate seismic intensity predictions, with
approximately 90% of the stations receiving warnings even
before the P-wave arrival.
Incorporating meta-learning and transfer-learning schemes
and exploring their potential applications within the broader
field of seismic event prediction and disaster management can
be a potential future research.
Data
and
Code
Availability:
For
reproducibility
of
the
results,
data
and
code
are
made
avail-
able
at
Github:
https://github.com/Blaze-raf97/
Seismic-Intensity-Prediction-using-SC-GNN-for-EEW.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This project is funded by RISE Internal Research Project
ID 2021-01-027, Title: “Earthquake Early Warning System in
Bangladesh”, from Bangladesh University of Engineering and
Technology (BUET), Dhaka.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Ni, H. Sun, P. Somerville, D. A. Yuen, C. Milliner, H. Wang, J. Zhou,
and Y. Cui, “Complexities of the Turkey-Syria doublet earthquake
sequence,” The Innovation, vol. 4, no. 3, p. 100431, 2023.
[2] H. Kanamori, “Earthquake prediction: an overview,” International Geo-
physics, vol. 81, pp. 1659–1672, 2003.
[3] D. J. Wald, V. Quitoriano, T. H. Heaton, and H. Kanamori, “Rela-
tionships between peak ground acceleration, peak ground velocity, and
modified Mercalli intensity in California,” Earthquake spectra, vol. 15,
no. 3, pp. 557–564, 1999.
[4] R. M. Allen and D. Melgar, “Earthquake early warning: Advances,
scientific challenges, and societal needs,” Annual Review of Earth and
Planetary Sciences, vol. 47, pp. 361–388, 2019.
[5] S. M. Mousavi and G. C. Beroza, “A machine-learning approach
for earthquake magnitude estimation,” Geophysical Research Letters,
vol. 47, no. 1, p. e2019GL085976, 2020.
[6] D. M. Boore, W. B. Joyner, and T. E. Fumal, “Equations for estimating
horizontal response spectra and peak acceleration from western north
american earthquakes: A summary of recent work,” Seismological re-
search letters, vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 128–153, 1997.
[7] W. Astuti, R. Akmeliawati, W. Sediono, and M.-J. E. Salami, “Hybrid
technique using singular value decomposition (svd) and support vector
machine (svm) approach for earthquake prediction,” IEEE Journal of
Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing,
vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 1719–1728, 2014.
[8] T. Erdik, M. Savci, and Z. S¸en, “Artificial neural networks for predicting
maximum wave runup on rubble mound structures,” Expert Systems with
Applications, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 6403–6408, 2009.
[9] W. Chen and L. Zhang, “An automated machine learning approach
for earthquake casualty rate and economic loss prediction,” Reliability
Engineering & System Safety, vol. 225, p. 108645, 2022.
[10] S. M. Mousavi and G. C. Beroza, “Machine learning in earthquake
seismology,” Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, vol. 51,
pp. 105–129, 2023.
[11] S. Dong, P. Wang, and K. Abbas, “A survey on deep learning and
its applications,” Computer Science Review, vol. 40, p. 100379, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1574013721000198
[12] R. U. Murshed, Z. B. Ashraf, A. H. Hridhon, K. Munasinghe, A. Ja-
malipour, and M. F. Hossain, “A CNN-LSTM-based fusion separation
deep neural network for 6g ultra-massive MIMO hybrid beamforming,”
IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 38 614–38 630, 2023.
[13] R. U. Murshed, S. K. Dhruba, M. T. I. Bhuian, and M. R. Akter, “Au-
tomated level crossing system: A computer vision based approach with
raspberry pi microcontroller,” in 2022 12th International Conference on
Electrical and Computer Engineering (ICECE), 2022, pp. 180–183.
[14] S. M. Mousavi and G. C. Beroza, “Deep-learning seismology,” Science,
vol. 377, no. 6607, p. eabm4470, 2022.
[15] T. Perol, M. Gharbi, and M. Denolle, “Convolutional neural network for
earthquake detection and location,” Science Advances, vol. 4, no. 2, p.
e1700578, 2018.
[16] O. M. Saad, A. G. Hafez, and M. S. Soliman, “Deep learning approach
for earthquake parameters classification in earthquake early warning
system,” IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters, vol. 18, no. 7,
pp. 1293–1297, 2021.
[17] N.-C. Ristea and A. Radoi, “Complex neural networks for estimating
epicentral distance, depth, and magnitude of seismic waves[-1pt],” IEEE
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters, vol. PP, pp. 1–5, 02 2021.
[18] Z. Li, M.-A. Meier, E. Hauksson, Z. Zhan, and J. Andrews, “Machine

--- Sayfa 18 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. XX, NO. X, FEBRUARY 2024
18
learning seismic wave discrimination: Application to earthquake early
warning,” Geophysical Research Letters, vol. 45, 05 2018.
[19] D. Jozinovi´c, A. Lomax, I. ˚A tajduhar, and A. Michelini, “Rapid
prediction of earthquake ground shaking intensity using raw waveform
data
and
a
convolutional
neural
network,”
Geophysical
Journal
International, vol. 222, no. 2, pp. 1379–1389, 05 2020. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1093/gji/ggaa233
[20] D. Jozinovi´c, A. Lomax, I. ˚A tajduhar, and A. Michelini, “Transfer
learning: improving neural network based prediction of earthquake
ground shaking for an area with insufficient training data,” Geophysical
Journal International, vol. 229, no. 1, pp. 704–718, 12 2021. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1093/gji/ggab488
[21] S. Bloemheuvel, J. V. D. Hoogen, D. Jozinovi´c, A. Michelini, and
M. Atzmueller, “Graph neural networks for multivariate time series
regression with application to seismic data,” International Journal of
Data Science and Analytics, pp. 1–16, 2022.
[22] J.
Fayaz
and
C.
Galasso,
“A
deep
neural
network
framework
for real-time on-site estimation of acceleration response spectra of
seismic ground motions,” Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 87–103, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/mice.12830
[23] T.-Y. Hsu, S.-K. Huang, Y.-W. Chang, C.-H. Kuo, C.-M. Lin,
T.-M. Chang, K.-L. Wen, and C.-H. Loh, “Rapid on-site peak
ground acceleration estimation based on support vector regression
and P-wave features in Taiwan,” Soil Dynamics and Earthquake
Engineering,
vol.
49,
pp.
210–217,
2013.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0267726113000742
[24] J. M¨unchmeyer, D. Bindi, U. Leser, and F. Tilmann, “The transformer
earthquake alerting model: a new versatile approach to earthquake early
warning,” Geophysical Journal International, vol. 225, no. 1, pp. 646–
656, 12 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1093/gji/ggaa609
[25] J. M. Espinosa Aranda, A. Jimenez, G. Ibarrola, F. Alcantar, A. Aguilar,
M. Inostroza, and S. Maldonado, “Mexico city seismic alert system,”
Seismological Research Letters, vol. 66, pp. 42–53, 1995.
[26] F. Franchi, A. Marotta, C. Rinaldi, F. Graziosi, L. Fratocchi, and
M. Parisse, “What can 5g do for public safety? structural health
monitoring and earthquake early warning scenarios,” Sensors, vol. 22,
no. 8, p. 3020, 2022.
[27] R. M. Allen, H. Brown, M. Hellweg, O. Khainovski, P. Lombard, and
D. Neuhauser, “Real-time earthquake detection and hazard assessment
by ElarmS across California,” Geophysical Research Letters, vol. 36,
no. 5, 2009.
[28] Y. Rong, T. Xu, J. Huang, W. Huang, H. Cheng, Y. Ma, Y. Wang, T. Derr,
L. Wu, and T. Ma, “Deep graph learning: Foundations, advances and
applications,” in Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD international
conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, 2020, pp. 3555–
3556.
[29] L. Yao, C. Mao, and Y. Luo, “Graph convolutional networks for text
classification,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
intelligence, vol. 33, no. 01, 2019, pp. 7370–7377.
[30] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in International
conference on machine learning.
PMLR, 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
[31] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast
for unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2020,
pp. 9729–9738.
[32] A. V. D. Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
contrastive predictive coding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
[33] R. Hadsell, S. Chopra, and Y. LeCun, “Dimensionality reduction by
learning an invariant mapping,” in 2006 IEEE Computer Society Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’06), vol. 2.
IEEE, 2006, pp. 1735–1742.
[34] R. U. Murshed, M. S. Ullah, M. Saquib, and M. Z. Win, “Self-supervised
contrastive learning for 6g UM-MIMO THz communications: Improving
robustness under imperfect CSI,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.11376,
2024.
[35] J. Chen, K. Chen, H. Chen, W. Li, Z. Zou, and Z. Shi, “Contrastive
learning for fine-grained ship classification in remote sensing images,”
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, vol. 60, pp. 1–
16, 2022.
[36] M. M. Bronstein, J. Bruna, Y. LeCun, A. Szlam, and P. Vandergheynst,
“Geometric deep learning: going beyond euclidean data,” IEEE Signal
Processing Magazine, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 18–42, 2017.
[37] P. W. Battaglia, J. B. Hamrick, V. Bapst, A. Sanchez-Gonzalez, V. Zam-
baldi, M. Malinowski, A. Tacchetti, D. Raposo, A. Santoro, R. Faulkner
et al., “Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and graph networks,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01261, 2018.
[38] J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl,
“Neural message passing for quantum chemistry,” in International
conference on machine learning.
PMLR, 2017, pp. 1263–1272.
[39] R. V. D. Berg, T. N. Kipf, and M. Welling, “Graph convolutional matrix
completion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02263, 2017.
[40] D. K. Duvenaud, D. Maclaurin, J. Iparraguirre, R. Bombarell, T. Hirzel,
A. Aspuru-Guzik, and R. P. Adams, “Convolutional networks on graphs
for learning molecular fingerprints,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 28, 2015.
[41] J. Fan, J. Bai, Z. Li, A. Ortiz-Bobea, and C. P. Gomes, “A GNN-
RNN approach for harnessing geospatial and temporal information:
application to crop yield prediction,” in Proceedings of the AAAI
conference on artificial intelligence, vol. 36, no. 11, 2022, pp. 11 873–
11 881.
[42] Z. Chen, F. Chen, L. Zhang, T. Ji, K. Fu, L. Zhao, F. Chen, and C. Lu,
“Bridging the gap between spatial and spectral domains: A survey on
graph neural networks,” CoRR, vol. abs/2002.11867, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.11867
[43] U. A. Bhatti, H. Tang, G. Wu, S. Marjan, and A. Hussain, “Deep
learning with graph convolutional networks: An overview and latest
applications in computational intelligence,” International Journal of
Intelligent Systems, vol. 2023, pp. 1–28, 02 2023.
[44] R. U. Murshed, A. H. Hridhon, and M. F. Hossain, “Deep learning
based power allocation in 6g URLLC for jointly optimizing latency
and reliability,” in 2021 5th International Conference on Electrical
Information and Communication Technology (EICT).
IEEE, 2021, pp.
1–6.
[45] H. Sahbi, “Learning laplacians in Chebyshev graph convolutional net-
works,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, 2021, pp. 2064–2075.
[46] G. Li, C. Xiong, A. Thabet, and B. Ghanem, “Deepergcn: All you need
to train deeper GCNs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.07739, 2020.
[47] Y. Li, D. Tarlow, M. Brockschmidt, and R. Zemel, “Gated graph
sequence neural networks,” 2017.
[48] ——,
“Gated
graph
sequence
neural
networks,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:1511.05493, 2015.
[49] P. Khosla, P. Teterwak, C. Wang, A. Sarna, Y. Tian, P. Isola,
A. Maschinot, C. Liu, and D. Krishnan, “Supervised contrastive learn-
ing,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 33, pp.
18 661–18 673, 2020.
[50] R. U. Murshed, M. A. Istiak, M. T. Rahman, Z. B. Ashraf, M. S. Ullah,
and M. Saquib, “A CNN based multifaceted signal processing framework
for heart rate proctoring using millimeter wave radar ballistocardiogra-
phy,” Array, vol. 20, p. 100327, 2023.
[51] D. Jozinovi´c, A. Lomax, I. ˚A tajduhar, and A. Michelini, “Rapid
prediction of earthquake ground shaking intensity using raw waveform
data
and
a
convolutional
neural
network,”
Geophysical
Journal
International, vol. 222, pp. 1379–1389, 05 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://academic.oup.com/gji/article/222/2/1379/5836721
[52] W. Zhu and G. C. Beroza, “PhaseNet: A deep-neural-network-based
seismic arrival time picking method,” Geophysical Journal International,
vol. 216, 10 2018.
[53] “ShakeMap,”
earthquake.usgs.gov.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//earthquake.usgs.gov/data/shakemap/
[54] D. Jozinovi´c, A. Lomax, I. ˚A tajduhar, and A. Michelini, “Transfer
learning: improving neural network based prediction of earthquake
ground shaking for an area with insufficient training data,” Geophysical
Journal International, vol. 229, no. 1, pp. 704–718, 12 2021. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1093/gji/ggab488
[55] D. Jozinovi´c, A. Lomax, I. ˇStajduhar, and A. Michelini, “Dataset -
seismic data from central-western italy used in the paper on rapid
prediction of ground motion using a convolutional neural network,” May
2021.
[56] S. M. Mousavi, Y. Sheng, W. Zhu, and G. C. Beroza, “STanford
EArthquake Dataset (STEAD): A global data set of seismic signals
for ai,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 179 464–179 476, 2019. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/smousavi05/STEAD
[57] R. U. Murshed, M. A. Zakaria, K. Noshin, M. F. Uddin, M. E. Ali,
and A. F. M. S. Amin, “Analysis of frequency content and statistical
relationship among earthquake parameters of seismic data,” Proceedings
of International Structural Engineering and Construction, vol. 10, p. 1,
2023.
[58] “Iris,” Iris.edu, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.iris.edu/hq/
[59] “ShakeMap
4
manual
shakemap
documentation
documentation,”
usgs.github.io. [Online]. Available: http://usgs.github.io/shakemap/

--- Sayfa 19 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. XX, NO. X, FEBRUARY 2024
19
[60] M. A. Zanini, L. Hofer, and F. Faleschini, “Reversible ground motion-to-
intensity conversion equations based on the EMS-98 scale,” Engineering
Structures, vol. 180, pp. 310–320, 2019.
[61] D. Bindi, F. Pacor, L. Luzi, R. Puglia, M. Massa, G. Ameri, and
R. Paolucci, “Ground motion prediction equations derived from the
Italian strong motion database,” Bulletin of Earthquake Engineering,
vol. 9, pp. 1899–1920, 2011.
[62] D. M. Boore, J. P. Stewart, E. Seyhan, and G. M. Atkinson, “NGA-
West2 equations for predicting PGA, PGV, and 5% damped PSA for
shallow crustal earthquakes,” Earthquake Spectra, vol. 30, no. 3, pp.
1057–1085, 2014.
[63] D. Bindi, L. Luzi, M. Massa, and F. Pacor, “Horizontal and vertical
ground motion prediction equations derived from the Italian Accelero-
metric Archive (ITACA),” Bulletin of earthquake engineering, vol. 8,
pp. 1209–1230, 2010.
[64] G. Forte, E. Chioccarelli, M. De Falco, P. Cito, A. Santo, and I. Iervolino,
“Seismic soil classification of Italy based on surface geology and
shear-wave velocity measurements,” Soil Dynamics and Earthquake
Engineering, vol. 122, pp. 79–93, 2019.
[65] D. C. Heath, D. J. Wald, C. B. Worden, E. M. Thompson, and G. M.
Smoczyk, “A global hybrid vs 30 map with a topographic slope-based
default and regional map insets,” Earthquake Spectra, vol. 36, no. 3, pp.
1570–1584, 2020.
[66] M. Kriegerowski, G. M. Petersen, H. Vasyura-Bathke, and M. Ohrn-
berger, “A deep convolutional neural network for localization of clus-
tered earthquakes based on multistation full waveforms,” Seismological
Research Letters, vol. 90, no. 2A, pp. 510–516, 2019.
[67] M. Pieska and A. Kassler, “TCP performance over 5g mmwave
links—tradeoff between capacity and latency,” in 2017 IEEE 13th In-
ternational Conference on Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking
and Communications (WiMob).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 385–394.
[68] X. Jiang, H. Shokri-Ghadikolaei, G. Fodor, E. Modiano, Z. Pang,
M. Zorzi, and C. Fischione, “Low-latency networking: Where latency
lurks and how to tame it,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 107, no. 2, pp.
280–306, 2018.
[69] S. E. Minson, M.-A. Meier, A. S. Baltay, T. C. Hanks, and E. S. Cochran,
“The limits of earthquake early warning: Timeliness of ground motion
estimates,” Science advances, vol. 4, no. 3, p. eaaq0504, 2018.
Rafid Umayer Murshed is a researcher and engi-
neer with a background in Electrical and Electronics
Engineering (EEE). He obtained his BSc degree in
EEE from Bangladesh University of Engineering
and Technology (BUET) in May 2022. Currently,
he is pursuing his master’s degree in the Electrical
and Computer Engineering (ECE) department at the
University of Texas at Dallas under the supervision
of Dr. Mohammad Saquib. He focuses on developing
innovative deep learning-based approaches for 6G
and Beyond wireless communication networks. His
research interests include UM-MIMO, beamforming, resource allocation, re-
configurable intelligent surfaces, remote sensing, signal processing, and wire-
less health monitoring. His scholarly work has been published in renowned
journals and conference proceedings.
Kazi Noshin completed her B.Sc. from the De-
partment of Computer Science and Engineering at
Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technol-
ogy (BUET) in May 2022. She holds the position of
a research assistant at the BUET-Japan Institute of
Disaster Prevention and Urban Safety (JIDPUS). Her
primary responsibilities at JIDPUS include prepar-
ing seismic datasets and developing deep learning-
based models to improve earthquake early warning
systems. Her research interest primarily focuses on
Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, and Deep
Learning techniques, concerned with human life improvements, health, and
behavior.
Md. Anu Zakaria holds a B.Sc. degree in Civil
Engineering from Bangladesh University of Engi-
neering and Technology (BUET), obtained in May
2022. He is currently pursuing his M.Sc. degree in
Structural Engineering at BUET, with a particular
focus on seismic assessment of structures. As a
Research Assistant at BUET-JIDPUS, he is involved
in the project “Earthquake Early Warning System in
Bangladesh”, where his primary responsibility is to
prepare seismic and geotechnical data to be used for
machine learning techniques. His research interests
revolve around dynamic analysis of structures, concrete technology and finite
element modeling of concrete bridges.
Md. Forkan Uddin (M’13) received his B.Sc.
and M.Sc. degrees both in Electrical and Elec-
tronic Engineering (EEE) from Bangladesh Uni-
versity of Engineering and Technology (BUET),
Dhaka, Bangladesh in 2003 and 2005, respectively,
and his Ph.D. degree in Electrical and Computer
Engineering from University of Waterloo, Canada
in 2011. In 2003, he joined as a Lecturer in the
Department of EEE, BUET, Bangladesh, where he is
currently a Professor. His research interests include
wireless communications and networking, smart grid
communications and load management, and optical fiber communications. Dr.
Uddin is a member of the Editorial Board of the Journal of Institutional
Engineering and Technology. He received “UGC Gold Medal 2017” in the
category “Engineering and Technology” from the University Grants Commis-
sion (UGC) of Bangladesh for his outstanding contributions to fundamental
research work.
A. F. M. S. Amin is a Professor in the Department
of Civil Engineering and the Director at BUET-
Japan Institute of Disaster Prevention and Urban
Safety of Bangladesh University of Engineering and
Technology. His academic and research interests
include teaching in civil engineering; he has led
dedicated research and development teams to design
and oversee the repair and retrofitting of structures,
earthquake protection, helping increase and preserve
the structural soundness of many important buildings
and remarkable bridges in Bangladesh.
Mohammed Eunus Ali is a Professor in the Depart-
ment of Computer Science and Engineering (CSE)
at Bangladesh University of Engineering and Tech-
nology (BUET). He is the group leader of Data
Science and Engineering Research Lab (DataLab)
at CSE, BUET. His research areas cover a wide
range of topics in database systems and information
management that include spatial databases, practical
machine learning, and data science. Dr. Eunus’s
research papers have been published in top-ranking
journals and conferences such as the VLDB Journal,
TKDE, ICDE, CIKM, PVLDB, and UbiComp. He also served as a Program
Committee Member of many prestigious conferences that include SIGMOD,
VLDB, AAAI, and SIGSPATIAL. Dr Eunus is a senior member of Association
of Computing Machinery (ACM), USA.
