
--- Sayfa 1 ---
1Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, The woodlands, TX, 77380 
2WesternGeco, Houston, TX, 77042 
Predictive Neural Networks for Geophysics with Enhanced 
Seismic Imaging  
Ping Lu1, Yanyan Zhang1, Jianxiong Chen1, Yuan Xiao1, George Zhao2 
 
 
Abstract 
We propose a predictive neural network architecture that can be utilized to update reference 
velocity models as inputs to the full waveform inversion. Deep learning models are explored to 
augment velocity model building workflows during processing the 3D seismic volume in salt-
prone environments. Specifically, a neural network architecture, with 3D convolutional, de-
convolutional layers, and 3D max-pooling, is designed to take standard amplitude 3D seismic 
volumes as an input. Enhanced data augmentations through generative adversarial networks and 
a weighted loss function enable the network to train with few sparsely annotated slices. Batch 
normalization is also applied for faster convergence. A 3D probability cube for salt bodies and 
inclusions is generated through ensembles of predictions from multiple models in order to 
reduce variance. Velocity models inferred from the proposed networks provide opportunities for 
FWI forward models to converge faster with an initial condition closer to the true model. In 
addition, in each iteration step, the probability cubes of salt bodies and inclusions inferred from 
the proposed networks can be used as a regularization term within the FWI forward modelling, 
which may result in an improved velocity model estimation while the output of seismic migration 
can be utilized as an input of the 3D neural network for subsequent iterations.  
Introduction 
Full waveform inversion (FWI) has become a popular method to estimate elastic earth properties 
from seismic data, and it has great utility in seismic velocity model building and seismic 
reflectivity imaging in areas of complex salt  (Chen, et al., 2018) (Wang, Zhang, Mei, Lin, & Huang, 
2019). FWI is a non-linear data-fitting procedure that matches the predicted to observed 
waveform data given an initial guess of the subsurface parameters. The velocity model 
parameters are updated to reduce the misfit between the observed and predicted data until the 
misfit is sufficiently small. Sharp velocity boundaries such as between salt and sediment are often 
updated manually for each iteration based on the seismic reflectivity images. 
Deep learning is a new area of machine learning research. With massive amount of computations, 
it has an end-to-end learning structure, and replaces the traditional feature extraction pipeline 
in machine learning with a signal learning algorithm. Thanks to the success of computer vision, 
deep learning has been widely adopted in the geophysical interpretation and inversion workflows 

--- Sayfa 2 ---
(Lu, Morris, Brazell, Comiskey, & Xiao, 2018). A proposal to harness neural networks to assist the 
geophysical FWI workflows followed by current examples of their products and success is 
presented.  
Proposed Methods 
Here, we introduce how to utilize the predicted probability cube inferred from a neural network 
based on seismic data to assist FWI workflow. The achieved salt mask probability cube is capable 
of assisting convergences of the velocity model in many aspects. In this paper, we discuss two 
major improvements contributed by the deep learning results. 
1. Initialization 
FWI is one of the techniques highly sensitive to its initial value of the velocity. Due to its non-
linearity and non-convexity, a naïve guess may lead the results converge to a local-optima or 
saddle point, causing a geologically unacceptable velocity model. The salt body with inclusions 
probability learned by deep learning model, on the other hand, has a solid numerical 
interpretation on salt-dome especially for the salt boundary, which can be utilized to generate a 
reasonable inference. 
A pre- or post-stack seismic volume, which is generated by 1-D depth-dependent sediment 
velocity profile, can be used as an input into the well-trained deep neural network to predict 
corresponding salt probability cube. However, unlike traditional method which treats the 
sediment velocity as the initial value and keeps updating on it, we use the predicted probability 
cube to create an initialization of the geological velocity model. Specifically, let 𝑚଴ denotes the 
initial guess for velocity model, 𝑃଴ as the first probability output of the deep learning network, 
we propose 
𝑚଴= 𝑣௦௔· 𝑃଴+ 𝑣௦௘· (1 −𝑃଴), 
where 𝑣௦௔ is the empirical velocity value for salt dome, and 𝑣௦௘ is the depth-dependent sediment 
velocity profile.  
2. Regularization 
Mathematically, FWI process can be formulated as an optimization problem with object function 
min
௠𝛷(𝑚) = ∑
‖𝐹௜(𝑚) −𝑑௜‖ଶ
௡ೞ
௜ୀଵ
. 
Here inside the equation, function 𝐹௜(·) denotes the forward modeling operation, 𝑑௜ is 
considered as the observed pre-stack signal. In this problem, as we have achieved additional 

--- Sayfa 3 ---
information for salt body probability cube in each iteration, it can be utilized as a priori 
information to the velocity model by adding a regularization term  
min
௠𝛷ᇱ(𝑚) = ∑
‖𝐹௜(𝑚) −𝑑௜‖ଶ+ 𝜆· ‖𝑚−𝑅(𝑃)‖ଶ
௡ೞ
௜ୀଵ
, 
such that 𝜆 is an empirical regularization weight and 𝑅(𝑃) = 𝑣௦௔· 𝑃+ 𝑣௦௘· (1 −𝑃) is 
considered as a prior function with deep learning probability output 𝑃. It can be seen that the 
initialization process is actually one realization of the prior function when 𝑃= 𝑃଴, however, as 
the initialization process is to provide a good starting point for velocity update, and the priori 
function 𝑅(𝑃) incorporated inside the regularization term pushes the predicted velocity model 
to match the probability information, it is better to distinguish the different objectives of these 
calculations.  
As the FWI proceed, the velocity model keeps updating and ultimately it approximates the true 
velocity model. The convergence criteria in the problem is set as   
‖𝛷′(𝑚௞ାଵ) −𝛷′(𝑚௞)‖ ≤𝜀, 
where 𝜀 is a pre-defined acceptable difference. It is also worth noting that, when the velocity               
converges, the predicted probability from deep learning (DL) network is close to a binary cube, 
such that 
𝑃௞ାଵ≈൜0   𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑛 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡 𝑖𝑠 𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑒 𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑡 𝑑𝑜𝑚𝑒 
1   𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑛 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡 𝑖𝑠 𝑜𝑢𝑡 𝑜𝑓 𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑡 𝑑𝑜𝑚𝑒. 
 
Figure 1. Velocity model from deep learning 

--- Sayfa 4 ---
 
Chart 1. Workflow 
Here, we present a flowchart to demonstrate the whole idea of how to integrate deep learning 
with FWI workflow.  
- Seismic Data represents 3D pre- or post-stack seismic data. 
- Deep Learning Model is used for detection of the most potential salt body including inclusions.  
- Starting Velocity Model (fig. 1) represents the blended salt velocity converted from probability 
cube inferred by deep learning model before FWI.  
- DL Predicted Salt Scenario is based on suggested velocity updates from regularized FWI. 
- Iterations stops as convergence criteria satisfied. 
- Final Model is different from the starting one in terms of salt velocity, salt geometry, and near-
salt sediment velocities; and results in more sensible velocity model, flatter gathers, and more 
focused sub-salt image.  
Applications with a Field Example 
The spatial consistency in salt body detection is barely addressed in general, while this is a 
remarkable aspect of human expertise. Our approach explicitly provides spatially consistent 
results as shown in fig.2. 

--- Sayfa 5 ---
 
Figure 2. Visualization of 3D Salt Surface Inferred from DL 
Altogether, experimental results generated from a real Gulf of Mexico seismic data suggest that 
the prediction represents a powerful framework, which provides complimentary information to 
the FWI procedure to generate a high resolution velocity model including an accurate salt model 
and ultimately a sharp subsalt image. Fig.3 (b) shows more continuous reflections versus fig.3 (a) 
in the subsalt region.  
          
 
(a)                                                                                          (b) 
                                                         Figure 3. Seismic imaging for subsalt  

--- Sayfa 6 ---
Conclusion 
A new workflow integrated with deep learning model is introduced for enhancing the seismic 
imaging quality with improved process of generation of salt velocity models. There are two 
significant benefits of leveraging the proposed approach compared with the conventional one. 
First, a salt velocity model, which could be used for initial velocity model for FWI algorithm, can 
be directly converted from a salt probability cube through inserting surrounding velocity model. 
A precise starting-velocity model is critical for the optimization process, which may end up finding 
the local minimum instead of the global minimum due to the initial guess far away from the 
ground truth. On the other hand, the salt probability cube could be used as an extra regularization 
term integrated in the objective function. Searching in three dimension in order to find out the 
optimal directions for optimization problems is an extremely challenging and time consuming 
task. In conjunction with output from deep learning model, the searching area is perfectly 
regularized in the salt probability mask region, which provides an opportunity to reach in 
convergence with a faster pace.   
Acknowledgement 
The authors thank Anadarko for permission to publish this work. 
References 
Chen, J., Sixta, D., Raney, G., Mount, V., Riddle, E., Nicholson, A., . . . Peng, C. (2018). Improved 
sub-salt imaging from reflection full waveform inversion guided salt scenario interpretation: A 
case history from deep water Gulf of Mexico. SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts, (pp. 
3773-3777). 
Lu, P., Morris, M., Brazell, S., Comiskey, C., & Xiao, Y. (2018). Using generative adversarial 
networks to improve deep-learning fault interpretation network. The Leading Edge, 578-583. 
Wang, P., Zhang, Z., Mei, J., Lin, F., & Huang, R. (2019). Full-waveform inversion for salt: A coming 
of age . The Leading Edge, 204-213. 
 
