
--- Sayfa 1 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
Embracing Data Incompleteness for Better Earthquake
Forecasting
L. Mizrahi1∗, S. Nandan1, and S. Wiemer1
1Swiss Seismological Service, ETH Zurich
Key Points:
• Two methods are proposed to invert ETAS parameters when catalog complete-
ness varies with time.
• Using pseudo-prospective experiments we compare the forecasting skill of our pro-
posed models to a strong ETAS null model.
• Including small events in simulations yields increasingly superior forecasts for de-
creasing target magnitudes when using STAI correction.
∗Sonneggstrasse 5, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland
Corresponding author: Leila Mizrahi, leila.mizrahi@sed.ethz.ch
–1–
arXiv:2105.00888v3  [physics.geo-ph]  1 Dec 2021

--- Sayfa 2 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
Abstract
We propose two methods to calibrate the parameters of the epidemic-type aftershock se-
quence (ETAS) model based on expectation maximization (EM) while accounting for
temporal variation of catalog completeness. The ﬁrst method allows for model calibra-
tion on long-term earthquake catalogs with temporal variation of the completeness mag-
nitude, mc. This calibration technique is beneﬁcial for long-term probabilistic seismic
hazard assessment (PSHA), which is often based on a mixture of instrumental and his-
torical catalogs. The second method generalizes the concept of mc, considering rate- and
magnitude-dependent detection probability, and allows for self-consistent estimation of
ETAS parameters and high-frequency detection incompleteness. With this approach, we
aim to address the potential biases in parameter calibration due to short-term aftershock
incompleteness, embracing incompleteness instead of avoiding it. Using synthetic tests,
we show that both methods can accurately invert the parameters of simulated catalogs.
We then use them to estimate ETAS parameters for California using the earthquake cat-
alog since 1932. To explore how model calibration, inclusion of small events, and account-
ing for short-term incompleteness aﬀect earthquakes’ predictability, we systematically
compare variants of ETAS models based on the second approach in pseudo-prospective
forecasting experiments for California. Our proposed model signiﬁcantly outperforms the
ETAS null model, with decreasing information gain for increasing target magnitude thresh-
old. We ﬁnd that the ability to include small earthquakes for simulation of future sce-
narios is the primary driver of the improvement and that accounting for incompleteness
is necessary. Our results have signiﬁcant implications for our understanding of earthquake
interaction mechanisms and the future of seismicity forecasting.
Plain Language Summary
Our capability to detect earthquakes varies with time, on one hand because more
and better instruments are being deployed over time, leading to long-term changes of de-
tection capability. On the other hand, earthquakes are more diﬃcult to be detected when
seismic activity is high, which manifests in short-term changes of detection capability.
Incomplete detection can lead to biases in epidemic-type aftershock sequence (ETAS)
models used for earthquake forecasting. We propose two methods that allow us to cal-
ibrate these models while accounting for long-term (ﬁrst method) and short-term (sec-
ond method) changes in detection capability, which allows us to use a larger and more
representative fraction of the available data. We test both methods on synthetic data
and then apply them to the Californian earthquake catalog. Using the second method,
we test how small earthquakes can help us improve ETAS forecasts. We ﬁnd that the
ability to include small earthquakes in simulations yields superior ETAS forecasts, and
that it is necessary to correct for short-term incompleteness to achieve this superiority.
The positive eﬀect on forecasting is strongest when forecasting relatively small events,
and decreases when forecasting larger events. These results have important implications
for our understanding of earthquake interactions and for the future of earthquake fore-
casting.
Keywords
data incompleteness, model inversion, ETAS, earthquake forecasting
1 Introduction
One of the key challenges in the ﬁeld of statistical seismology, or seismology in gen-
eral, is the development of accurate earthquake forecasting models, with epidemic-type
aftershock sequence (ETAS) models (see Ogata, 1998; Veen and Schoenberg, 2008; Nan-
dan et al., 2017) currently being widely used for this purpose. ETAS models account for
–2–

--- Sayfa 3 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
the spatio-temporal clustering of earthquakes, and they have been shown in retrospec-
tive, pseudo-prospective, and prospective forecasting experiments to be among the best-
performing earthquake forecasting models available today (Nandan et al., 2019c; Taroni
et al., 2018, Woessner et al., 2011; Cattania et al., 2018; Mancini et al., 2019; Mancini
et al., 2020). Furthermore, they are used for operational earthquake forecasts by the USGS
(Field et al., 2017), in Italy (Marzocchi et al., 2014), and New Zealand (D. Rhoades et
al., 2016).
A fundamental requirement for reliable parameter estimation of the ETAS model
is the completeness of the training catalog above the magnitude of completeness, mc. As
we can impossibly know with certainty what we did not observe, mc itself needs to be
estimated, and numerous approaches to this problem have been proposed (Wiemer and
Wyss, 2000; Cao and Gao, 2002; Woessner and Wiemer, 2005; Amorese, 2007; Rydelek
and Sacks, 1989; see Mignan and Woessner (2012) for an overview). mc is known to vary
in space and time, due to gradual improvement of the seismic network, software upgrades,
and so on. Several methods have been proposed to estimate its spatial and temporal vari-
ation (Wiemer and Wyss, 2000; Mignan et al., 2011;Woessner and Wiemer, 2005; Am-
ato and Mele, 2008; Nanjo et al., 2010; Hutton et al., 2010; Mignan and Chouliaras, 2014;
Schorlemmer and Woessner, 2008; Hainzl, 2016b). In particular, Hainzl (2016b) addresses
an additional important cause of variation in time of mc, short-term aftershock incom-
pleteness (STAI). Because earthquakes strongly cluster in time, seismic networks can only
capture a subset of events during periods of high activity (Kagan, 2004).
As mentioned earlier, a reliable estimation of ETAS parameter depends on a re-
liable estimate of mc. Although the biasing eﬀects on ETAS parameter estimates caused
by data incompleteness are known and discussed (Hainzl, 2016b; Seif et al., 2017; Zhuang
et al., 2017), nearly all applications of the ETAS model assume for simplicity a global
magnitude of completeness for the entirety of the training period. This assumption is
problematic in several ways.
First, in order to be complete for the entire training period, the modeller is often
forced to use very conservative estimates of mc, as a result completely ignoring abun-
dant and high-quality data from more complete periods. Furthermore, mc is often as-
sumed to be equal to the minimum magnitude of earthquakes that can trigger aftershocks,
m0, and this conservative assumption can introduce a bias to ETAS parameter estimates.
This idea that earthquakes below mc are relevant for our understanding of earthquakes’
clustering behavior was thoroughly discussed by Sornette and Werner (2005a), who pointed
out the important distinction between m0 and mc, also providing constraints for m0. Al-
though small earthquakes trigger fewer aftershocks than large ones do, Marsan (2005),
as well as Helmstetter et al. (2005), found that small earthquakes, being more numer-
ous, are as important as large ones for earthquake triggering. Thus, it is natural to as-
sume that a larger diﬀerence between mc and m0 will lead to a larger bias in the esti-
mated parameters.
Alternatively, one may estimate ETAS parameters from catalogs with restricted
space-time volume which can have low overall mc values. Parameters estimated in this
way can however be dominated by one or two sequences and may not represent long-term
behavior, thus making the use of ETAS models non-ideal for long-term probabilistic seis-
mic hazard assessment (PSHA). Instead, the modellers rely on smoothed seismicity ap-
proaches based on declustered catalogs (see e.g. Gerstenberger et al., 2020; Petersen et
al., 2018; Wiemer et al., 2009), which is a problematic approach due to the biasing ef-
fects of declustering on the size distribution of mainshocks, and thus on the estimated
seismic hazard (Mizrahi et al., 2021). In this regard, Marzocchi and Taroni (2014) dis-
cussed the need for spatial declustering so as not to distort future seismic hazard, and
Llenos and Michael (2020) proposed an approach to calculate regionally optimized back-
ground earthquake rates from ETAS to be used for the U.S. Geological Survey National
–3–

--- Sayfa 4 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
Seismic Hazard Model (NSHM), stressing the need for methods to address catalog het-
erogeneities such as time-dependent incompleteness.
Additionally, with the assumption of a constant overall mc, the crucial requirement
of completeness of the training catalog is not fulﬁlled during large aftershock sequences,
which can bias the estimated parameters. Several studies have highlighted the impor-
tance of considering short-term variation of mc in the context of ETAS models. These
include Hainzl (2016b) and Hainzl (2016a), who modeled STAI based on the short-term
rate of earthquakes, bringing into relation true and apparent triggering laws; Stallone
and Falcone (2020), who proposed a method to stochastically replenish catalogs suﬀer-
ing from STAI, to be used for better operational earthquake forecasting and hazard as-
sessment, albeit without addressing the eﬀectiveness of the method in this regard; Zhuang
et al. (2017), who showed that estimating ETAS parameters using a replenished cata-
log is more stable with respect to cutoﬀmagnitude; Omi et al. (2014), who proposed a
method to estimate parameters of the ETAS model from incompletely observed after-
shock sequences, by statistically modelling detection deﬁciency.
In this article, we thoroughly address the use of small earthquakes for seismic haz-
ard forecasting. For this, we develop two complementary methods with which long-term
(ﬁrst method) and short-term (second method) temporal variations of mc can be accounted
for when calibrating ETAS models and when issuing ETAS-based forecasts. The ﬁrst method
extends the expectation maximization scheme for ETAS parameter inversion (Veen and
Schoenberg, 2008) for application to training catalogs with time-varying completeness
magnitude mc(t). This simultaneously allows the inclusion of historical data in the pa-
rameter inversion, as well as the inclusion of small magnitude events, which make up a
large fraction of data and can enable the ability to more clearly illuminate faults. ETAS
models can hence be trained on a more representative and informative set of data, which
in some areas facilitates a more appropriate approach to PSHA. With the second method
proposed in this article, we want to utilize the knowledge about clustering derived us-
ing the ETAS model to quantitatively estimate the level of completeness of a catalog at
any given time, and then use this knowledge to minimize the incompleteness-induced bias
in the ETAS model. We approach this issue by generalizing the notion of mc, moving
from a binary completeness space (complete versus incomplete) to a continuous-valued
completeness space by means of a magnitude-dependent detection probability −embrac-
ing incompleteness instead of avoiding it, as has been proposed previously by Ogata and
Katsura (2006) and Omi et al. (2014). While the ﬁrst method described in this article
allows mc(t) as an input to the ETAS parameter calibration, which makes it powerful
in a long-term context, the second method addresses the additional challenge of estimat-
ing short-term variations of completeness. To understand their abilities and limitations,
we subject both methods to rigorous synthetic tests. Then, we apply them to Califor-
nian earthquake data and interpret the results in light of the ﬁndings of the synthetic
tests. Using the second approach, we systematically assess how the inclusion of small earth-
quakes, which may be incompletely detected, aﬀects the performance of earthquake fore-
casts. We conduct pseudo-prospective 30-day forecasting experiments for California, de-
signed to answer several questions: Does our new model outperform the current state
of the art? If so, what is the role of the newly estimated ETAS parameters in this im-
provement? Similarly, what is the role of newly included small earthquakes in this im-
provement, and the role of the estimated high-frequency detection incompleteness? How
do the models perform for diﬀerent target magnitude thresholds?
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the earth-
quake catalog that was used in this analysis. The modiﬁed ETAS parameter inversion
methods are presented in Section 3.1 for time-varying mc, and in Section 3.2 for time-
varying probabilistic detection incompleteness. Sections 3.3 and 3.4 describe the formu-
lation of probabilistic detection incompleteness and the algorithm for joint estimation
of ETAS parameters and detection probability. Section 4 presents synthetic tests for both
–4–

--- Sayfa 5 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
methods, and Section 5 presents applications of both methods to the Californian data.
Section 6 describes pseudo-prospective forecasting experiments used to assess the im-
pact of the newly acquired information on the forecastability of earthquakes in Califor-
nia. Finally, in Section 7, we present our conclusions.
2 Data
In this article, we use the ANSS Comprehensive Earthquake Catalog (ComCat) pro-
vided by the U.S. Geological Survey. We adopt the preferred magnitudes as deﬁned in
ComCat, and use as study region the collection area around the state of California as
proposed in the RELM testing center (Schorlemmer and Gerstenberger, 2007). We con-
sider events of magnitude M ≥0.0, with magnitudes rounded into bins of size ∆M =
0.1. For the major part of the study, the time frame used is January 1, 1970 until De-
cember 31, 2019. For the analysis of long-term variations in mc, we extend the time frame
to start on January 1, 1932, when instrumentation was introduced to the Californian seis-
mic network (Felzer, 2007).
Whenever ETAS parameters are inverted, we use the ﬁrst ﬁfteen years of data to
serve as auxiliary data. Thus, the start of the primary catalog is either January 1985,
or January 1947. Earthquakes in the auxiliary catalog may act as triggering earthquakes
in the ETAS model, but not as aftershocks.
To estimate a constant magnitude of completeness of the catalog, we use the method
described by Mizrahi et al. (2021) with an acceptance threshold value of p = 0.1, which
yields mc = 3.1 for the time period between 1970 and 2019. This method is adapted
from Clauset et al. (2009) and jointly estimates mc and the b-value of the Gutenberg-
Richter law (Gutenberg and Richter, 1944) describing earthquake size distribution. It
compares the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) distance between the observed cumulative dis-
tribution function (CDF) and the ﬁtted GR law to KS distances obtained for magnitude
samples simulated from said GR law. A value of mc is accepted if at least a fraction of
p = 0.1 of KS distances is larger than the observed one.
3 Model
3.1 ETAS parameter inversion for time-varying mc
Consider an earthquake catalog
C = {ei = (mi, ti, xi, yi), i ∈{1, . . . , n}}
(1)
consisting of events ei of magnitudes mi which occur at times ti and locations (xi, yi).
Furthermore, consider a time-varying magnitude of completeness mc(t) deﬁned for all
ti. We say that the catalog is complete if mi ≥mc(ti)∀i.
The ETAS model describes earthquake rate as
l(t, x, y) = µ +
X
i:ti<t
g(mi, t −ti, x −xi, y −yi).
(2)
That is, the sum of background rate µ and the rate of all aftershocks of previous events
ei. The aftershock triggering rate g(m, ∆t, ∆x, ∆y) describes the rate of aftershocks trig-
gered by an event of magnitude m, at a time delay of ∆t and a spatial distance (∆x, ∆y)
from the triggering event. We here use the deﬁnition
–5–

--- Sayfa 6 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
g(m, ∆t, ∆x, ∆y) =
k0 · ea(m−mref )
(∆t+c)1+ω
e
−∆t
τ
·
 (∆x2 + ∆y2) + d · eγ(m−mref )1+ρ ,
(3)
as in Nandan et al. (2017).
To calibrate the ETAS model, the nine parameters to be optimized are the back-
ground rate µ and the parameters k0, a, c, ω, τ, d, γ, ρ which parameterize the aftershock
triggering rate g(m, t, x, y) given in Equation 3. Implicitly, the model assumes that all
earthquakes with magnitude larger than or equal to mref can trigger aftershocks. We
build on the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm to estimate the ETAS param-
eters (Veen and Schoenberg, 2008). In this algorithm, the expected number of background
events ˆn and the expected number of directly triggered aftershocks ˆli of each event ei
are estimated in the expectation step (E step), along with the probabilities pij that event
ej was triggered by event ei, and the probability pind
j
that event ej is independent. Fol-
lowing the E step, the nine parameters are optimized to maximize the complete data log
likelihood in the maximization step (M step). E and M step are repeated until conver-
gence of the parameters. The usual formulation of the EM algorithm deﬁnes
pij =
gij
µ + P
k:tk<tj gkj
,
(4)
pind
j
=
µ
µ + P
k:tk<tj gkj
,
(5)
with gkj = g(mk, tj −tk, xj −xk, yj −yk) being the aftershock triggering rate of ek at
location and time of event ej. For a given target event ej, Equations (4-5) deﬁne pij to
be proportional to the aftershock occurrence rate gij, and pind
j
to be proportional to the
background rate µ. As an event must be either independent or triggered by a previous
event, the normalization factor Λj := µ + P
k:tk<tj gkj in the denominator of Equa-
tions 4-5 stipulates that pind
j
+ P
k:tk<tj pkj = 1. This relies on the assumption that
all potential triggering earthquakes of ej were observed, that is, all events prior to tj above
the reference magnitude (minimum considered magnitude), mref were observed. To ful-
ﬁll this requirement, most applications of the method deﬁne mref to be equal to the con-
stant value of mc.
For the case of time-varying mc(t), we deﬁne mref := mini{mc(ti)}, the minimum
mc(ti) for times ti of events in the complete catalog. This implies that for the times when
mc(t) > mref the requirement of complete recording of all potential triggers may be
violated. Events whose magnitudes fall between mref and mc(t) are not part of the com-
plete catalog and are considered to be unobserved (even though they may have been de-
tected by the network). Hence, the normalization factor Λj (the denominator of Equa-
tions 4-5) needs to be adapted to account for the possibility that ej was triggered by an
unobserved event.
Consider
ξ(t) =
R mc(t)
mref fGR(m) · G(m) dm
R ∞
mc(t) fGR(m) · G(m) dm ,
(6)
the ratio between the expected number of events triggered by an unobserved event and
the expected number of events triggered by an observed event at time t. Here, fGR =
β·e−β·(m−mref ) is the probability density function of magnitudes according to the GR
law, and G(m) =
R ∞
0
RR
R g(m, t, x, y) dx dy dt is the total number of expected aftershocks
larger than mref of an event of magnitude m. Note that in the calculation of G(m) we
make the simplifying assumption that the considered region R extends inﬁnitely in all
–6–

--- Sayfa 7 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
directions, allowing a facilitated, asymptotically unbiased estimation of ETAS param-
eters (Schoenberg, 2013). Analogously,
ζ(t) =
R mc(t)
mref fGR(m) dm
R ∞
mc(t) fGR(m) dm
(7)
is the ratio between the expected fraction of unobserved events and the expected frac-
tion of observed events at time t. If β > a −ργ, both ξ(t) and ζ(t) are well-deﬁned
and we have that
ξ(t) = e−(a−β−ργ)·∆m(t) −1,
(8)
ζ(t) = eβ·∆m(t) −1,
(9)
where ∆m(t) = mc(t)−mref. Consider the productivity exponent α := a−ρ·γ, which
describes the exponential relationship between aftershock productivity and magnitude
of an event. The condition that β is larger than the productivity exponent α is gener-
ally fulﬁlled in naturally observed catalogs (Helmstetter, 2003). If this were not the case,
earthquake triggering would be dominated by large events and one would need to intro-
duce a maximum possible magnitude for both denominators to be ﬁnite (see available
equations in Sornette and Werner (2005b); Sornette and Werner (2005a)). The normal-
ization factor Λj consists of the sum of background rate and aftershock rates of all events
which happened prior to ej. In the case of time-varying mc, besides the possibilities of
being a background event or being triggered by an observed event, the event ej can also
be triggered by an unobserved event. We thus generalize Λj by adding to the rate of af-
tershocks gkj of each observed triggering event ek the expected rate of aftershocks of un-
observed triggering events at that time, gkj ·ξ(tk). This yields Λj = µ+P
k:tk<tj gkj ·
(1 + ξ(tk)) and thus the generalized deﬁnition of pij and pind
j
is given by
pij =
gij
µ + P
k:tk<tj gkj · (1 + ξ(tk)),
(10)
pind
j
=
µ
µ + P
k:tk<tj gkj · (1 + ξ(tk)).
(11)
Note that the probability puj that event ej was triggered by an unobserved event
is given such that pind
j
+ puj + P
k:tk<tj pkj = 1. In the above equations, the special
case of mc(t) ≡mref is accounted for when ξ(t) ≡0. In this special case, ˆn and ˆli are
obtained by summing independence probabilities (ˆn = P
j pind
j
) and triggering prob-
abilities (ˆli = P
j pij), respectively. In the generalized case however, ˆn and ˆli are the
estimated number of background events and aftershocks of event ei above mref, which
includes unobserved events. Similarly to inﬂating the triggering power, we hence inﬂate
the observed event numbers to account for unobserved events. Whenever an event is ob-
served at time tj, we expect that ζ(tj) events occurred under similar circumstances (with
same independence and triggering probabilities), but were not observed. This yields
ˆn =
X
j
pind
j
· (1 + ζ(tj)),
(12)
ˆli =
X
j
pij · (1 + ζ(tj)).
(13)
–7–

--- Sayfa 8 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
With these adapted deﬁnitions of pij, pind
j
, ˆn and ˆli (Equations 10 - 13), ETAS param-
eters can be inverted using the procedure described by Veen and Schoenberg (2008).
3.2 ETAS parameter inversion for time-varying probabilistic detection
To overcome the binary view of completeness which forces us to disregard earth-
quakes which were detected but happen to fall between mref and mc(t), we can take the
generalization of the EM algorithm for ETAS parameter inversion one step further by
introducing a time and magnitude-dependent probability of detection,
f : R≥mref × R −→[0, 1]
(m, t) 7→p.
To be able to account for such a probabilistic concept of catalog completeness in the ETAS
inversion algorithm, one needs to generalize ξ(t) and ζ(t) (Equations 6 and 7). In con-
trast to before, the magnitude of an event does not determine whether or not the event
has been detected. We therefore adapt the bounds of integration in numerator and de-
nominator such that all events above magnitude mref are considered. To obtain the ex-
pected number of earthquakes triggered by observed and unobserved events, the inte-
grands are multiplied by the probability of the triggering events to be observed, f(m, t),
or unobserved, (1−f(m, t)), respectively. The generalized formulations of ξ(t) and ζ(t)
then read
ξ(t) =
R ∞
mref (1 −f(m, t)) · fGR(m) · G(m) dm
R ∞
mref f(m, t) · fGR(m) · G(m) dm
,
(14)
and
ζ(t) =
R ∞
mref (1 −f(m, t)) · fGR(m) dm
R ∞
mref f(m, t) · fGR(m) dm
.
(15)
For compatible choices of f(m, t), fGR(m), G(m), we ﬁnd that ξ(t) and ζ(t) are well-
deﬁned. Consider for instance the special case of binary detection, where f(m, t) is de-
ﬁned via the Heaviside step function H as fbin(m, t) = H(m −mc(t)), which is equal
to 1 if m ≥mc(t) and 0 otherwise. This is the case discussed in the previous section,
for which we have well-deﬁnedness if β > a −ργ.
The reference magnitude mref is a model constant. Smaller values of mref allow
the modeller to use a larger fraction of the observed catalog, which can be especially use-
ful in regions with less seismic activity.
Note that both generalizations of the ETAS inversion algorithm (for time-varying
completeness or for time-varying probabilistic detection) can without further modiﬁca-
tion be applied when mc or detection probability vary with space. The formulation is
based on the assumption that the behavior of observed events is locally representative
(in space and/or time) of the behavior of unobserved events.
3.3 Rate-dependent probabilistic detection incompleteness
In this section we present our approach to deﬁne f(m, t), where the temporal com-
ponent is purely driven by the current rate of events. Note that this means we only cap-
ture changes in detection due to changes in short-term circumstances, and neglect long-
term changes due to network updates. We make the following simplifying assumptions.
–8–

--- Sayfa 9 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
• Any earthquake will obstruct the entire seismic network from detecting smaller
earthquakes for a duration of tR (recovery time of the network).
• Magnitudes of events that are simultaneously blocking the network are distributed
according to the time-invariant Gutenberg-Richter law which also describes the
magnitude distribution of the full catalog (Gutenberg and Richter, 1944).
De Arcangelis et al. (2018) found that short-term aftershock incompleteness can be well
explained in terms of overlapping seismic records, while instrumental coverage of an area
plays a subsidiary role. Nevertheless, assuming tR to be independent of the magnitude
of the event, and independent of the spatial distance between the event and the locations
of interest, is certainly a major simpliﬁcation which could be reﬁned in subsequent stud-
ies.
Conveniently, the ETAS model provides a simple way of calculating the current rate
of events in the region R as
λ(t) =
ZZ
R
l(t, x, y) dx dy =
ZZ
R
µ +
X
i:ti<t
g(mi, t −ti, x −xi, y −yi) dx dy.
(16)
For the remainder of this paper, we will refer to the current rate of events in the region,
λ(t), simply as the current rate of events. The probability f(m, t) of an earthquake to
be detected is then given by the probability of it being the largest of all the earthquakes
that are currently blocking the network. Consider
f(m, t) =

1 −e−β·(m−mref )tR·λ(t)
.
(17)
Here, tR·λ(t) is an approximation of the expected number of events blocking the net-
work at time t, and the term 1−e−β·(m−mref ) is the probability of any given earthquake’s
magnitude falling between mref and m, where β = b·ln 10 is the exponent in the GR
law with basis e. Thus, f(m, t) is the probability that in the set of tR·λ(t) events cur-
rently blocking the network, all of them have a magnitude of less than m, which is the
condition for an event of magnitude m to be detected. Because the time-dependence of
f(m, t) is solely controlled by the time-dependence of λ, we here use the terms f(m, t)
and f(m, λ) interchangeably.
Plugging this deﬁnition of f(m, t) into Equations 14 and 15, and setting κ := −a−ργ
β
,
we obtain
ξ(t) =
1
(κ + 1) · B(κ + 1, tR · λ(t) + 1) −1,
(18)
ζ(t) = tR · λ(t),
(19)
so long as β > a −ργ, where B is the Beta function. A positive background rate µ >
0 ensures λ(t) > 0
∀t. Expressions analogous to (18) and (19) hold when alternative
exponents are chosen instead of tR · λ in the deﬁnition of f(m, λ) (Equation 17).
The network recovery time tR and the current event rate λ(t) at the times ti of all
earthquakes ei need to be estimated from the data.
–9–

--- Sayfa 10 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
3.4 Estimating probabilistic epidemic-type aftershock incompleteness
(PETAI)
3.4.1
Estimation of (tR, β) when λi are known
The function f(m, t) brings with it two parameters, tR and β, which need to be
estimated in addition to the ETAS parameters. We here describe how tR and β can be
jointly estimated using a maximum likelihood approach for the case when current event
rates λi = λ(ti) are known. In reality, the λi have to be estimated themselves. This is
described in Section 3.4.2.
In the case when the true ETAS parameters, as well as the current event rates λ(ti)
for all events ei in the primary catalog {e1, . . . , en}, are known, the GR-law exponent
β and the network recovery time tR can be estimated by optimizing the log-likelihood
LL of observing the catalog at hand.
LL =
n
X
i=1
(ln (νi + 1) −ln N)
+
n
X
i=1

νi · ln (1 −e−β·(mi−mref ))

(20)
+
n
X
i=1
(ln β −β · (mi −mref)) ,
where N = Pn
i=1(νi+1), and νi = tR·λ(ti) is an approximation of the expected num-
ber of events blocking the network at time ti. The expression for LL given above is valid
in general for alternative exponents νi in the deﬁnition of detection probability (Equa-
tion 17). LL is derived from the likelihood Li of an event to have magnitude mi and to
be observed during a current event rate of λi = λ(ti), and the current event rate be-
ing λi,
Li = femp(λi) · fGR(mi) · fdet(mi, λi),
(21)
where fGR(m) is the probability density function of magnitudes given by the GR law,
fdet(m, λ) is the detection probability as deﬁned in Equation 17, and
femp(λ) =
(
tR·λ+1
P
i(tR·λi+1),
if λ ∈{λ1, . . . , λn}
0,
otherwise
(22)
is the empirical density function of event rates. femp(λ) is deﬁned such that
n
X
i=1
femp(λi) = 1
(23)
and
femp(λi) ∝
1
R ∞
mref fGR(m) · fdet(m, λi) dm = λi · tR + 1,
∀i = 1, . . . , n.
(24)
Without the latter condition (Equation 24), we would wrongly assume that the values
λ(ti) were uniformly drawn from the true distribution of event rates. However, in our
sample of λi, large values of λ are underrepresented, because during times t when λ(t)
is high, events are less likely to be detected, and those times and their corresponding rates
are thus less likely to be part of our sample. Deﬁning femp(λi) to be inversely propor-
tional to the fraction of events that are observed when the current rate is λi corrects for
this under-representation. This yields
–10–

--- Sayfa 11 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
Li =
νi + 1
P
j(νj + 1) · β · e−β·(mi−mref ) ·

1 −e−β·(mi−mref )νi
,
(25)
which explains the term for LL (Equation 20). Figure S1 shows the log likelihood of a
synthetic test catalog for diﬀerent values of tR and β when λi are known. The result-
ing estimators match the data-generating parameters.
3.4.2
Estimation of λi when ETAS parameters and (tR, β) are known
On one hand, the λi depend on the ETAS parameters (see Equation 16). On the
other hand, the sum of aftershocks of previous earthquakes in the deﬁnition of λ(t) (Equa-
tion 16) does not account for aftershocks of events that were not detected. As in the ETAS
parameter inversion, to account for aftershocks of undetected events in the calculation
of λ(t), we inﬂate the triggering power of each event ei by a factor of 1+ξ(ti) and de-
ﬁne
λ(t) =
ZZ
R
µ dx dy +
X
i:ti<t
(1 + ξ(ti)) ·
ZZ
R
g(mi, t −ti, x −xi, y −yi) dx dy.
(26)
3.4.3
Estimation of λi and (tR, β) when ETAS parameters are known
ξ(t) however requires knowledge of (tR, β) (see Equation 18). This implies that even
when ETAS parameters are ﬁxed, an additional, lower-level circular dependency dictates
the relationship between (λi)i=1,...,n and (tR, β).
To fully estimate the high-frequency probabilistic detection incompleteness, given
ﬁxed ETAS parameters, we recursively re-estimate (λi)i=1,...,n (see Section 3.4.2) and
(tR, β) (see Section 3.4.1), until (tR, β) meets a convergence criterion, starting with an
informed or random initial guess for (tR, β).
3.5 PETAI inversion algorithm
The overarching joint inversion of ETAS parameters (E) and high-frequency de-
tection incompleteness (I = (λi, tR, β)) starts with estimating ETAS parameters in the
usual way, i.e. using the algorithm described in Section 3.1, with a time-independent com-
pleteness magnitude mc(= mref) above which all events are detected. It then recursively
re-estimates I (see Section 3.4.3) and E (see Section 3.2) until convergence of the ETAS
parameters. A simpliﬁed illustration of the inversion algorithm is shown in Figure 1. Start-
ing with the initial ETAS parameters obtained assuming constant mc, event rates can
be calculated at each point in time. Given these event rates, the detection probability
function is calibrated, which then provides insight into the temporal evolution of cat-
alog (in-)completeness. ETAS parameters can then be re-estimated, now also using data
below mc, by accounting for the estimated incompleteness. With this new set of ETAS
parameters, event rates can be re-calculated, upon which detection probability is re-calibrated,
and so on, until all convergence criteria are satisﬁed. Figure 2 shows the detailed ﬂow
diagram of the PETAI inversion algorithm.
4 Synthetic tests
4.1 Synthetic Test for ETAS model with long-term variation of mc (ST1)
To test the ETAS parameter inversion for time-varying mc, we generate 400 com-
plete synthetic catalogs using ETAS and then artiﬁcially impose a given mc(t) on the
–11–

--- Sayfa 12 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
catalogs. Assuming mc(t) to be known, we use the method described in Section 3.1 to
infer the parameters used in the simulation.
We estimate mc(t) based on the Californian catalog described in Section 2 with a
time horizon from 1932 to 2019. Fixing the b-value we had estimated for the main cat-
alog (1970 - 2019, M ≥3.1, b = 1.01±0.006, see Mizrahi et al. (2021) for the method
used), we estimate mc for successive 10 year periods starting in 1932. The last period
then comprises only 8 years of data. Estimation of mc is analogous to the main cata-
log, using the method of Mizrahi et al. (2021) with an acceptance threshold of p = 0.1,
but keeping b = 1.01 ﬁxed.
This yields
mc(t) =

































4.3
for t between 1932 and 1941,
3.9
for t between 1942 and 1951,
4.3
for t between 1952 and 1961,
3.4
for t between 1962 and 1971,
3.1
for t between 1972 and 1981,
3.3
for t between 1982 and 1991,
2.4
for t between 1992 and 2001,
2.8
for t between 2002 and 2011,
3.6
for t between 2012 and 2019.
(27)
The large increase in mc for the years 2012 to 2019 is due to the Ridgecrest events
in 2019. Although the period aﬀected by aftershock incompleteness only makes up a small
fraction of the 8 year period, our method with an acceptance threshold of p = 0.1 yields
a conservative estimate of mc. To avoid such an eﬀect, one could use shorter than 10 year
periods, or use diﬀerent methods to estimate time-varying mc.
Note that our method to invert ETAS parameters for time-varying mc (Section 3.1)
accepts mc(t) as an input and works independently of how this mc(t) was obtained. We
here want to keep the focus on the parameter inversion and thus choose the described
approach to estimate mc(t) due to its simplicity.
To mimic a realistic scenario, we simulate the synthetic catalogs using parameters
obtained after applying ETAS parameter inversion for time-varying mc on the Califor-
nia data, with two manual corrections.
The ﬁrst correction is done because it has been shown that certain assumptions in
the ETAS model such as a spatially isotropic aftershock distribution or a temporally sta-
tionary background rate, as well as data incompleteness can lead to biased estimations
of the productivity exponent (Hainzl et al., 2008; Hainzl et al., 2013; Seif et al., 2017).
This bias can lead to a lack of clustering when catalogs are simulated. We thus use an
artiﬁcially increased productivity exponent α′ for our simulations as follows.
Consider the branching ratio η, deﬁned as the expected number of direct aftershocks
(larger than mref) of any earthquake larger than mref,
η =
Z ∞
mref
fGR(m) · G(m) dm.
(28)
It follows easily that
η = β · k0 · π · d−ρ · τ −ω · ec/τ · Γ(−ω, c/τ)
ρ · (β −(a −ργ))
,
(29)
–12–

--- Sayfa 13 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
if β > a −ρ · γ, where Γ(s, x) =
R ∞
x ts−1e−t dt is the upper incomplete gamma func-
tion.
We ﬁx α′ = 2.0 (based on Helmstetter (2003); Z. Guo and Ogata (1997)) and from
this derive new values for a and k0, keeping the branching ratio η constant. In partic-
ular, we deﬁne
a′ := α′ + ρ · γ,
(30)
k0
′ := k0 · β −(a′ −ρ · γ)
β −(a −ρ · γ) .
(31)
It can be easily shown that in this way, the branching ratio η remains the same as long
as β −(a −ρ · γ) > 0.
Secondly, we reduce the background rate µ. In this way, the size of the simulated
catalogs is reduced such that inversion requires a reasonable amount of computational
power, even for large regions and time horizons. The ﬁnal parameters used for the sim-
ulation of the catalogs can be found in Figure 3 (black crosses).
400 catalogs of events of magnitude M ≥2.4 = mref are simulated as described
in Text S1 for the time period of January 1832 to December 2019 in a square of 40° lat
× 40° long. Because of missing long-term aftershocks in the beginning of the simulated
catalogs, we allocate a burn period of 100 years in the beginning of the simulated pe-
riod and are left with catalogs from 1932 to 2019. The starting year of our synthetic cat-
alogs coincides with the introduction of instrumentation in California (Felzer, 2007). This
allows us to impose the mc(t) history observed in California on the synthetic catalogs
by discarding all events ei for which mi < mc(ti).
We apply the ETAS inversion for time-varying mc with the here-obtained mc(t)
(see Equation 27) to the synthetic catalogs.
4.2 Synthetic test for PETAI (ST2)
To test the PETAI inversion algorithm, 500 synthetic catalogs are created as fol-
lows. We use the parameters obtained after applying the PETAI inversion algorithm to
the California data (1970 to 2019) with mref = 2.5. The value of mref is chosen to achieve
a balance between the amount of data available for the inversion and the computational
power required to process such an amount of data. For the reasons described in Section
4.1, we reduce the background rate µ and modify the parameters to obtain a corrected
productivity exponent as described in Equations 30 - 31. The ﬁnal parameters used for
the simulation of the catalogs can be found in Figure 4(d) - (l).
Using these parameters, we simulate as described in Text S1, 500 synthetic cata-
logs that resemble the Californian catalog, for the period between 1850 and 2020 in a
square of 40° lat × 40° long. As in the previous case, because of missing long-term af-
tershocks in the beginning of the simulated catalogs, we discard the ﬁrst 100 years of data
and are left with catalogs from 1950 to 2020. For each of these catalogs and given the
ETAS parameters used for simulation, we calculate the current event rate at the time
of each event in the catalogs (Equation 16). As the current event rate is to a large ex-
tent driven by aftershock rates of earlier events, we expect overestimation of detection
probabilities, as well as overestimation of independence probabilities, during the begin-
ning of the time period (Wang et al., 2010; Schoenberg et al., 2010; Nandan et al., 2019a).
For this reason, we allocate another 20 years of burn period, leaving us with catalogs start-
ing in 1970.
–13–

--- Sayfa 14 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
Each of the 500 catalogs are then artiﬁcially made incomplete as follows. Using the
detection probability function given by Equation 17, and the b-value of 1.03 estimated
from the Californian catalog using PETAI inversion, we calculate for each event its prob-
ability of being detected. According to this probability we randomly decide for each event
whether it has been detected or not. The subset of all events that were detected is then
used as a test catalog. This is done assuming diﬀerent values for tR of 1.97 (as estimated
from the Californian catalog), 5, 10, 30, 60, and 180 minutes, yielding six variations of
the test catalog per originally simulated catalog, which makes a total of 3000 test cat-
alogs. The value of tR greatly inﬂuences the fraction of undetected events in the result-
ing catalog, and we chose to investigate diﬀerent values of tR to ensure there are suﬃ-
ciently many test catalogs with a fraction of undetected events similar to the fraction
of estimated undetected events inferred for California. This estimated number of unde-
tected events is obtained by summing ζ(ti), the expected number of unobserved events
per observed event, which is estimated as a component of the PETAI inversion, over all
occurrence times ti of events in the primary catalog.
4.3 Results for ST1
Figure 3 shows the ETAS parameters used in the simulation of the synthetic cat-
alogs, and the median, distribution, and 95% conﬁdence intervals of the parameters in-
verted from the synthetic catalogs. The parameters estimated from the synthetic cat-
alogs lie reasonably close to the data-generating parameters. In particular, a, c, ω, τ and
γ are accurately inverted, while µ, k0, d and ρ tend to be overestimated. The reason for
the overestimation of ρ stems from a computational simpliﬁcation made during inver-
sion. In order to avoid extremely large triggering probability matrices, we only consider
pairs of source and target events with a spatial distance of less than 50 source lengths,
where one source length is deﬁned using the magnitude to length scaling relations de-
ﬁned in Wells and Coppersmith (1994). This upper limit for distances between event pairs
translates to an exaggeration of the estimated values of ρ. We conﬁrmed that as we grad-
ually relax the cutoﬀcriterion, the estimated value of ρ moves closer to the true values
used for generating the synthetic catalog. The regularizer of the spatial kernel, d, is pos-
itively correlated with ρ, hence an overestimation of the latter translates to an overes-
timation of the former. The overestimation of µ can also be explained, considering that
distant aftershocks have a higher tendency to appear independent due to the artiﬁcially
imposed cutoﬀcriterion.
4.4 Results for ST2
4.4.1
Inverted number of undetected events
Figure 4 (a) shows the series of events of one example synthetic test catalog over
the primary time period in blue, with the undetected synthetic events marked in black.
The number of undetected events is 1282, which makes up 6.25% of the original synthetic
catalog. Figure 4 (b) shows cumulative number of undetected synthetic events over time
in black, compared to the cumulative inferred number of undetected events in blue for
the same example catalog. Overall, it is estimated as a result of applying the PETAI in-
version that 1068.88 events were undetected in the example catalog. While this under-
estimates the true number of 1282 undetected events, the major part of events can be
reconstructed, with accurate timing.
Figure 4 (c) shows inferred versus actual number of undetected events for 3000 test
catalogs assuming diﬀerent detection eﬃciencies. The estimated fraction of undetected
events is distributed around the actual fraction of undetected events, and the median
estimated fraction matches well the median actual fraction, with a slight tendency to-
wards underestimation.
–14–

--- Sayfa 15 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
4.4.2
Accuracy of inverted parameters
Figure 4 (d) - (n) shows the ETAS parameters and (tR, β) that were used in the
simulation of the synthetic catalogs, and the parameters inverted from these synthetic
catalogs. In general, the inverted parameters correspond well to the parameters used in
the simulation, although some of the estimates are slightly biased. The parameters c and
ω, both describing the temporal decay of aftershock rate, show a trend of increasing bias
with increasing tR, that is, with increasing incompleteness. For the other parameters,
no clear dependency of the bias on tR is recognizable. The estimate of c matches the true
value almost perfectly for tR = 1.97 minutes, but starts being overestimated for larger
values of tR above 30 minutes. On the other hand, ω shows an increasing tendency of
being underestimated with increasing values of tR. Earlier aftershocks have a larger ten-
dency to be missing due to STAI, which leads to a seemingly slower decay of aftershock
rate in time. As the PETAI algorithm has a tendency to underestimate STAI (Figure
4 (c)), and this tendency increases with increasing tR, this translates into an increasing
negative bias in the inferred values of ω.
Qualitatively, the tendencies to over- or underestimate the remaining parameters
are identical with the tendencies observed in ST1 (Section 4.3). It is therefore plausi-
ble that these tendencies are consequences of a ﬁnite time horizon and ﬁnite spatial win-
dow used in the simulation of the synthetics, rather than being artifacts of the PETAI
inversion algorithm.
Finally, we observe a tendency to underestimate tR, which means that detection
probabilities tend to be overestimated. This is in line with our previous observation that
the fraction of undetected events tends to be slightly underestimated, suggesting the PETAI
inversion to be slightly conservative.
5 Application to California
We calculate ETAS parameters, β and tR (if applicable) using diﬀerent inversion
algorithms to Californian data. Additionally, we provide the resulting values for produc-
tivity exponent α = a −ργ and branching ratio η (see Equation 29).
First, we apply usual inversion method as described in Section 3.1 with a constant
completeness magnitude of mc ≡3.1 to the main catalog (1970 to 2019). Then, we in-
vert the parameters by accounting for long-term time-variation of completeness (Equa-
tion 27). In this case, the extended catalog from 1932 to 2019 can be used with a ref-
erence magnitude of mref = 2.4. Finally, we apply PETAI inversion to the main cat-
alog (1970 to 2019) with a reference magnitude of mref = 2.5. Note that the estima-
tion of β is independent of the ETAS parameter estimates for the ﬁrst two applications,
but not in the case of PETAI inversion (see Section 3.4).
To allow a better comparison between parameters inverted using diﬀerent meth-
ods when mref varies, we translate the parameters to a reference magnitude of mref =
3.1 as follows. With the exception of µ, k0 and d, all parameters are mref-agnostic, and
the three exceptions can easily be adjusted. Denote by ∆m the diﬀerence between new
and original reference magnitude, ∆m = m′
ref −mref. Then,
d′ := d · e∆m·γ
(32)
ensures that
d · eγ·(m−mref ) = d′ · eγ·(m−m′
ref ).
(33)
Stipulating that the branching ratio η (Equation 29) remains unchanged, it follows that
–15–

--- Sayfa 16 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
k′
0 := k0 · e∆m·γ·ρ.
(34)
The adaptation of the background rate µ follows trivially from the GR law,
µ′ = µ · e−β·∆m.
(35)
5.1 Interpretation of inverted parameters
Table 1 shows the estimated values of ETAS parameters, β, and tR (if applicable)
obtained using diﬀerent inversion algorithms to Californian data. Additionally, the re-
sulting values for the productivity exponent α = a−ργ and branching ratio η (see Equa-
tion 29) are provided. The ﬁrst, second, and fourth column show the parameters obtained
from applying the method with mc ≡3.1, when using long-term-variations of mc, and
when using PETAI, respectively. Columns three and ﬁve contain the parameters of columns
two and four after having been transformed to a reference magnitude of mref = 3.1.
Overall, the inverted parameters are roughly consistent among the three algorithms.
Although there are slight diﬀerences between the estimated parameters, they can plau-
sibly be attributed to diﬀerent input datasets, which vary for the three algorithms in ei-
ther time-span or magnitude range. In the following, we present some speculative ex-
planations of the observed diﬀerences.
We ﬁnd that the estimate of τ obtained from the ETAS model calibrated on the
extended catalog (1932 to 2019) with the long-term time variation of mc is smaller than
in the other two cases, to an extent that the uncertainties obtained in the synthetic tests
cannot explain this decrease. This decrease despite the use of a catalog spanning a longer
duration compared to the other two cases, shows that τ may actually better reﬂect the
long-term behavior of earthquake interaction, rather than being determined by the ﬁ-
nite duration of the catalog. Note that if the temporal ﬁniteness of the catalog was the
dominant factor in the determination of τ, one would expect an increase of τ with in-
creasing time spanned by the catalog. Furthermore, the less pronounced decrease of τ
in case of the PETAI inversion speaks against the possibility that the decrease is caused
by inclusion of lower magnitude earthquakes revealing previously unseen earthquake in-
teractions.
A somewhat counter-intuitive observation is the increase of c for both new inver-
sion techniques. For the case of long-term variation of mc, in particular, c shows a sig-
niﬁcant increase considering the expected uncertainties. The parameter c has been in-
terpreted to reﬂect aftershock incompleteness (Kagan, 2004; Lolli and Gasperini, 2006;
Hainzl, 2016a) and would thus be expected to decrease when this eﬀect is accounted for
by the model (Seif et al., 2017). The observed higher value of c even after accounting
for STAI thus requires a diﬀerent interpretation of c. Narteau et al. (2009) found a de-
pendency of c on faulting style, and brought the parameter in relation with diﬀerential
stress and the intensity of stress re-distribution. Another possible interpretation provided
by Lippiello et al. (2007) is based on the dynamical scaling hypothesis in which time dif-
ferences relate to magnitude diﬀerences. Shcherbakov et al. (2004) proposed a general-
ized Omori law which incorporates three empirical scaling laws (Gutenberg and Richter,
1944, B˚ath, 1965, Utsu, 1961) with a dependence of c on the cutoﬀmagnitude which can
qualitatively explain our observations: The value inverted for c is highest in the case of
mref = 2.4, and lowest for mref = 3.1. Overall, one should be careful to not over-interpret
this estimate of c. After all, c is overestimated for large values of tR in the PETAI syn-
thetic test and hence an observed increase in c might be a consequence of complex in-
terdependencies of all parameters involved.
While the branching ratio η does not substantially vary with the diﬀerent inver-
sion methods, we observe a slightly increased productivity exponent for the PETAI in-
–16–

--- Sayfa 17 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
version. Although the increase lies within expected uncertainty, such an increase is ex-
pected given the results of Seif et al. (2017), with the extent of the observed increase be-
ing in line with their estimated extent of underestimation for the productivity exponent.
The background rate µ shows a signiﬁcant increase when a longer time horizon is
considered, and decreases signiﬁcantly when STAI is accounted for. As µ is clearly over-
estimated in the synthetic test with long-term variation of mc, and only slightly over-
estimated in the case of PETAI, we may suspect that the increased value for µ in the
ﬁrst case is an artifact of the inversion method, while the decrease in background rate
with PETAI could suggest that including smaller magnitude events in our model by ac-
counting for incompleteness reveals previously hidden earthquake interactions, result-
ing in a lower µ.
The parameter γ, which describes the exponential relationship between earthquake
magnitude and the distance to the event at which the aftershock rate starts to decrease
faster, is signiﬁcantly increased in the case of long-term variation of mc. Slight overes-
timation is expected based on the synthetic tests, but not to this extent.
At the same time, ρ increases for both new inversion techniques. Again, overesti-
mation of ρ is expected given the results of the synthetic tests and the observed values
might thus be artifacts of the algorithms applied. As the problem of the ﬁnite spatial
region applies in the same way to standard ETAS as well as the other two methods, this
is unlikely to be the cause of the diﬀerence in parameter estimates.
The value of β shows an increase from 2.33 to 2.37, which translates to a b-value
increase from 1.01 to 1.03, when STAI is accounted for in the PETAI inversion. This is
expected due to the underestimated number of small events caused by STAI.
5.2 Incompleteness insights through PETAI
In addition to a new set of estimated ETAS parameters, applying the PETAI in-
version to the Californian catalog produces further interesting outputs. Similarly to the
case of the synthetic catalog, Figure 5 (a) shows the estimated cumulative number of un-
detected events over time. As expected, the increase is predominantly step-wise, caused
by short, incomplete periods during aftershock sequences, and long, complete periods
in-between. While the total expected number of undetected events is at 5041.74, the ex-
trapolated number obtained from a GR law ﬁtted on M ≥3.1 events is only 88.91. This
estimate of the number of unobserved events diﬀers from the PETAI estimate in that
it assumes perfect detection above M3.1. Although the true number of undetected events
can never be known, the synthetic test suggests that the PETAI result is reliable and
even slightly conservative, and thus the GR law extrapolation would be a severe under-
estimation of the true number of undetected events.
The magnitude-dependent detection probability evolution is illustrated in Figure
5 (b). In around 84% of event times ti, events of magnitude M ≥4 are expected to be
detected with a probability of 99.9% or more. Similarly, in 82% of event times ti, M ≥
3 events are expected to be detected with a probability of 99% or more. Spikes of incom-
pleteness during large sequences lead to detection probabilities of less than 50% for smaller
events, in the most extreme case for events of magnitude M ≤3.47.
As expected, periods of elevated incompleteness coincide with the periods of rapid
increase in undetected events shown in (a). The last step in (a), which corresponds to
the 2019 Ridgecrest sequence, is extraordinarily large compared to all previous steps. This
is most likely explained by the fact that the sequence was better recorded than compa-
rable sequences in previous years. When the detection capability of the seismic network
improves, the recovery time tR becomes shorter. Because we have assumed tR to be sta-
tionary for simplicity, a larger number of recorded events will lead to a smaller estimated
–17–

--- Sayfa 18 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
detection probability, which in turn leads to larger numbers of expected undetected events.
In future versions of the model, to avoid such artifacts, it would be advisable to com-
bine the possibility of including long-term changes in completeness (as in the model de-
scribed in Section 3.1) with rate-dependent aftershock incompleteness by means of a non-
stationary tR.
Figure 5 (c) - (g) shows excerpts of Figure 5 (b) for the 1989 M6.9 Loma Prieta,
the 1992 M6.1 Joshua Tree and 7.3 Landers, the 1994 M6.7 Northridge, the 1999 M7.1
Hector Mine, and the 2019 M6.4 and 7.1 Ridgecrest events, in comparison to the mc(t)
estimate given by the formulation of Helmstetter et al. (2006) which was provided for
Southern California. While their deﬁnition is not probabilistic, we observe that their mc
5 minutes after the mainshock lies between 90% and 99% detection according to PETAI.
The shape of the recovery from incompleteness does not fully coincide for the two meth-
ods, with generally slower recovery in the case of PETAI for the shown excerpts. Helm-
stetter et al. (2006) use a simpler formulation, and do not provide arguments for their
speciﬁc choice of parameterization of mc(t). On the other hand, the parametric descrip-
tion of the magnitude of 50% detection by Ogata and Katsura (2006), presented for the
example of the 2003 Miyagi-Ken-Oki earthquake, takes a shape similar to the one ob-
tained through PETAI, although it is not quantitatively comparable to the case of Cal-
ifornia.
The range of observed states of detection eﬃciency during the 2019 Ridgecrest se-
quence is visualized in Figure 5 (h). Prior to the large events, detection is almost per-
fect for all magnitudes. After the M6.4 event, detection is weakened and recovers with
time, until the M7.1 mainshock, when it is again weakened. Around 15 minutes after the
earthquake, events of magnitude below 3.0 still have almost no chance to be detected,
with M3.5 events having roughly a 50% chance to be detected. After three hours, de-
tection has already clearly improved, although M2.5 events are still almost surely not
detected. After six days, the detection probability function almost corresponds to the
prefect detection state, which was in place prior to the main events.
5.3 Comments on computational time
There are two aspects to consider when discussing the computational time of the
parameter inversion techniques presented here. On one hand, the increased complexity
of the algorithms plays an important role. In particular, the PETAI inversion comprises
multiple loops of ETAS and incompleteness estimation. Although convergence was usu-
ally reached after 4 iterations, this still implies a minimum factor of 4 in terms of com-
putation time which is only required for ETAS inversion, on top of which comes the time
needed for the estimation of detection parameters and event rates. The second factor,
which contributes even more to an increase of computation time, is the increased size
of the catalog which is available to be used. For our application to Californian data, the
number of events used in the PETAI inversion increases by a factor of 3.78 because the
minimum considered magnitude is reduced from 3.1 to 2.5. The leads the number of pairs
of potentially related events to increase from 7.3 million to 47.1 million. Note that these
numbers are obtained after imposing the 50 source length cutoﬀcriterion described in
4.3. While this increase in the number of potentially related event pairs causes a sub-
stantial increase in run time, educated initial guesses for ETAS parameter inversions can
substantially reduce run time without aﬀecting the results. Our Python 3.8 implemen-
tation of the PETAI inversion, run with a single core (Intel Xeon E5-2697v2) of the Eu-
ler high-performance computing (HPC) cluster at ETH Zurich, took 23 hours. Roughly
20% of this time was spent on the optimization of event rates and detection parameters,
and 80% on the optimization of ETAS parameters.
In contrast to the PETAI inversion, the run time of the ETAS parameter inversion
with time-varying mc is barely aﬀected by model complexity. During synthetic exper-
–18–

--- Sayfa 19 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
iments, we found the run time to be comparable to the run time of the usual ETAS in-
version when the number pairs of potentially related events was similar.
6 Pseudo-prospective forecasting experiments
To better understand if and how the PETAI model can improve earthquake fore-
casts, we conduct pseudo-prospective forecasting experiments. Note that as these exper-
iments are computationally expensive, we conduct them for the PETAI method only. As
most aftershocks occur soon after their triggering event, accounting for STAI in ETAS
simulations seems promising for forecasting. The parameter inversion for long-term vari-
ations of mc is mainly intended as a tool to obtain ETAS parameters in regions where
data is sparse and a model inversion would not be possible otherwise.
6.1 Competing models
We compare ﬁve models.
1. The base ETAS model assumes perfect detection above a constant mc = 3.1 and
is used as the null model.
2. PETAI, the alternative model, has two modiﬁcations to the null model. First, it
uses improved ETAS parameter estimates that were obtained in the PETAI in-
version with a reference magnitude mref of 2.5. Second, magnitude M ≥2.5 earth-
quakes are allowed to trigger and be triggered. For this, the events in the train-
ing catalog, which act as triggering earthquakes in the simulation, have their trig-
gering capability inﬂated by 1 + ξ(t), as estimated in the PETAI inversion.
Two intermediate models are assessed to dissect the eﬀect of the two modiﬁcations.
3. par only uses ETAS parameter estimates obtained from PETAI, but only M ≥
3.1 events are allowed to trigger and be triggered, assuming perfect detection there
(i.e. ξ(t) ≡0). In this case, the parameters obtained for the PETAI model have
to be transformed to be compatible with a reference magnitude of mref = 3.1
as described in Equations 32 - 35.
4. Vice-versa, trig only allows M ≥2.5 events to trigger and be triggered, using the
inverted ξ(t) for inﬂated triggering, but does not use the improved ETAS param-
eter estimates. In this case, the parameters obtained for the null model have to
be transformed to be compatible with a reference magnitude of mref = 2.5 as
described in Equations 32 - 35.
Lastly, we assess an additional benchmark model to test whether deliberately underes-
timating mc is an appropriate alternative to the rather complex PETAI model.
5. low mc assumes perfect detection above a constant mc = 2.5. This model uses
neither the parameter estimates obtained from PETAI, nor the inverted ξ(t) for
inﬂated triggering, but it allows M ≥2.5 events to trigger and be triggered and
thus is based on the same data as the PETAI-based models.
6.2 Experiment setup
For a testing period length of 30 days, we deﬁne a family of training and testing
periods such that the testing periods are consecutive and non-overlapping. Each train-
ing period ends with the starting date of its corresponding testing period. The starting
date of the ﬁrst testing period is January 1st, 2000. The end date of the last of the 244
testing periods is January 16th, 2020.
–19–

--- Sayfa 20 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
For each testing period, all competing models are trained based on the correspond-
ing training data. Then, forecasts are issued with each model through simulation of 100,000
possible continuations of the training catalog. Because the testing data is ignored when
the models are calibrated, these forecasts are pseudo-prospective. This is done by sim-
ulating Type I earthquakes (the cascade of aftershocks of earthquakes in the training cat-
alog) and Type II earthquakes (simulated background earthquakes and their cascade of
aftershocks) similarly to how it is described by Nandan et al. (2019b). The algorithm
for simulation is described in detail in Text S1.
The performance of each model is evaluated by calculating the log-likelihood of the
testing data given the forecast. See Text S2 for details on the calculation of the log-likelihood
using the full distribution approach as described by Nandan et al. (2019b) for a fair eval-
uation of ETAS-based models. Two competing models can be compared by calculating
the information gain (IG) of the alternative model Malt over the null model M0, which
is simply the diﬀerence in log-likelihood of observing the testing data. The mean infor-
mation gain (MIG) is calculated as the mean over all testing periods. This evaluation
metric is similar to other metrics that have been used for model comparison, such as the
total information gain or information gain per earthquake (IGPE) used in the CSEP T-
test (Harte and Vere-Jones, 2005; D. A. Rhoades et al., 2011; Zechar et al., 2013; Strader
et al., 2017, see Savran et al., 2020 for recent complementary CSEP testing metrics) or
the residual-based log-likelihood ratio score (Clements et al., 2011; Bray et al., 2014; Gor-
don et al., 2015; Gordon et al., 2021).
As an additional benchmark, we calculate the total IGPE of the ETAS null model
versus a spatially and temporally homogeneous Poisson process (STHPP) model. Note
that the STHPP model is not considered a participant of the forecasting experiment and
superiority is always discussed relative to the ETAS null model.
For details on the STHPP model and on the conditions under which one model is
considered superior over another, see Text S2 and Nandan et al. (2019b).
6.3 Time evolution of the parameters of the competing models
Figure 6 shows the parameter evolution with increasing training period obtained
with standard ETAS (mc = 2.5 and mc = 3.1) and PETAI inversion. Two parame-
ters, namely µ and τ, show a systematic decrease and increase, respectively, with grow-
ing time horizon of the training catalog. When compared to the uncertainties in the syn-
thetic tests, the extents of the changes of µ are larger than the 95% conﬁdence intervals,
while the changes of τ lie within the expected uncertainties. A possible explanation for
this observation is that an increased time horizon of the training catalog reveals more
long-term earthquake interactions, leading to a higher value of τ, that is a later onset
of the exponential taper in the temporal aftershock density, and simultaneously to a lower
background rate µ, as more events can be interpreted as aftershocks of previous earth-
quakes.
Nearly all parameter estimates show a jump in 2010, caused by the 2010 El-Mayor
Cucapah earthquake sequence, and a second jump in 2019, caused by the 2019 Ridge-
crest sequence. There are several reasons why such jumps in parameter estimates could
occur. In the case of the 2010 events, the main earthquake occurred outside of Califor-
nia and thus network coverage can play a role, as well as the absence of a large fraction
of aftershocks due to the boundaries of the considered region. Furthermore, triggering
parameters can diﬀer between regions, sequences and can also depend on the magnitude
of the mainshocks (Nandan et al., 2019a; Nandan et al., 2021a; Ouillon and Sornette,
2005; Sornette and Ouillon, 2005; Nandan et al., 2021b). These dependencies can increase
the representation of the active region and particular sequences in the catalog and lead
to sudden changes in the overall parameters.
–20–

--- Sayfa 21 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
6.4 Forecasting performance of the competing models
Figure 7 shows the results of the pseudo-prospective forecasting experiments. For
a target magnitude threshold of mt = 3.1, PETAI as well as trig only signiﬁcantly out-
perform the ETAS null model with p-values of virtually 0 and a mean information gain
of 0.97 and 0.94, respectively. Note that this improvement is over a very strong null model,
which has a total information gain of 49’246 (i.e. a MIG of 202.66 or an IGPE of 5.62)
over the STHPP model. PETAI has a slightly positive but not statistically signiﬁcant
information gain compared to trig only. On the other hand, par only and low mc do not
signiﬁcantly outperform the ETAS null model. This suggests that the main driver of the
improvement of the forecast is the inclusion of small events between M2.5 and M3.1 in
the simulations, rather than the newly obtained parameter estimates. It also indicates
that accounting for incompleteness, which is possible due to the estimated ξ(ti) obtained
in the PETAI inversion, is necessary for this improved forecast. The sole inclusion of events
between M2.5 and M3.1 in the simulations assuming completeness above M2.5 is not
suﬃcient to obtain signiﬁcant improvements. For all considered values of mt, PETAI and
trig only rank higher than low mc in terms of MIG, which further supports the idea that
accounting for STAI is relevant for improved ETAS-based earthquake forecasting.
The temporal evolution of the cumulative information gain of the two superior mod-
els shows a decrease during the 2010 El Mayor-Cucapah and the 2019 Ridgecrest sequences.
Those sequences were most active in Southern California, where the seismic network is
much denser than in the rest of the considered region (Hutton et al., 2010; Schorlemmer
and Woessner, 2008). The assumption of spatially homogeneous detection incomplete-
ness is thus inaccurate and may be the reason for over-inﬂation of the aftershock pro-
ductivity during these sequences, explaining the decrease in information gain. One can
therefore expect that accounting for spatial variation of STAI in subsequent models may
lead to even better forecasts.
With increasing values of mt to 3.5, 4.0, 4.5, and 5.0, the IGPE of the ETAS null
model versus the STHPP model increases to 5.92, 5.92, 6.62, and 7.44, respectively. At
the same time, the mean information gain values between the competing ETAS-based
models generally decrease, and almost no model signiﬁcantly outperforms any other com-
peting model. Occasionally, par only is outperformed by the ETAS null model or by trig only.
These observations suggest that taking into account information about smaller earth-
quakes mainly helps improving ETAS-based forecasts of smaller earthquakes. More pre-
cisely, simulating aftershocks of small earthquakes is the key ingredient for improved fore-
casting of similarly-sized events. Although within the framework of the standard ETAS
model, small earthquakes can trigger large ones, and their relative abundance implies
signiﬁcant contribution to the overall triggering (Marsan, 2005; Helmstetter et al., 2005;
Sornette and Werner, 2005a), we ﬁnd that the beneﬁcial eﬀect vanishes when forecast-
ing large events. Additional ways exist in which small earthquakes can contribute to im-
proving forecasting models. Besides their potential to cumulatively contribute to after-
shock triggering, the large number of earthquakes below mc can help to highlight the un-
derlying fault structure, which, when accounted for, can signiﬁcantly improve forecast-
ing performance (Gordon et al., 2021; Bach and Hainzl, 2012; Cattania et al., 2018; Y.
Guo et al., 2015). In fact, small earthquakes have been shown to improve forecasts in
the context of other models (Mancini et al., 2019; Mancini et al., 2020), and somewhat
mixed overall results but a clear signal that small earthquakes do contribute to trigger-
ing through the redistribution of static stresses have been reported (Meier et al., 2014;
Segou et al., 2013; Nandan et al., 2016).
Helmstetter et al. (2006) compared the probability gain of their time-dependent
model versus their similar but time-independent model and found that probability gain
decreases with an increasing target magnitude threshold. They speculated that this ob-
servation may be due to a smaller sample size when the target magnitude threshold in-
creases. Helmstetter and Werner (2014) found the same decrease in the context of a dif-
–21–

--- Sayfa 22 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
ferent, non-parametric kernel space-time smoothing model. Although the study was based
on a larger amount of data than Helmstetter et al. (2006), they likewise speculated that
this decrease is due to a small sample size. In our case, the same eﬀect is observed at
considerably large sample sizes of 3601, 1111, 307, and 85 events for mt = 3.5, 4.0, 4.5,
and 5.0. Another possible explanation for this eﬀect is provided by the ﬁndings of mul-
tiple previous studies using both non-parametric (Nichols and Schoenberg, 2014; Spas-
siani and Sebastiani, 2016) and parametric (Nandan et al., 2019a; Nandan et al., 2021b)
approaches, that earthquakes tend to preferentially trigger aftershocks of similar size.
Their results can explain the improved forecast of small events when small events are
used for simulation, as well as the vanishing of this improvement when the magnitude
diﬀerence between newly included events and target events becomes large. This could
furthermore serve as an alternative explanation of the results of Helmstetter et al. (2006)
and Helmstetter and Werner (2014).
Note that the IGPE of the ETAS null model against the STHPP model increases
with increasing mt, while Helmstetter et al. (2006) observe a decrease in probability gain
against a temporally homogeneous and spatially variable Poisson model. This suggests
that spatial inhomogeneity becomes more important with increasing target magnitude,
while temporal inhomogeneity based on small earthquakes becomes less important with
increasing target magnitude. It is important to highlight that the 30-day testing peri-
ods of the present study, in contrast to 1-day periods as in Helmstetter et al. (2006), pre-
vent ETAS models from being updated after large events. This likely understates the
extent of superiority that could be achieved by models which include M2.5 to M3.1 events,
and thus the role of small earthquakes, in daily forecasts.
7 Conclusion
We propose a modiﬁed algorithm for the inversion of ETAS parameters when mc
varies with time, and an algorithm for the joint inversion of ETAS parameters and prob-
abilistic, epidemic-type aftershock incompleteness. We test both methods on synthetic
catalogs, concluding that they can accurately invert the parameters used for simulation
of the synthetics. The given formulations are rather general and can equally be applied
to spatial or spatio-temporal variations of mc, as well as to any suitable deﬁnition of a
detection probability function.
Two potential use cases are the estimation of ETAS parameters based on the Cal-
ifornian catalog since 1932 with long-term ﬂuctuations of mc between 4.3 and 2.4, and
the estimation of ETAS parameters and short-term aftershock incompleteness based on
the incomplete Californian catalog of events above M2.5. The latter is further used to
test the forecasting power of small earthquakes. Results of numerous pseudo-prospective
forecasting experiments suggest that
• Information about small earthquakes signiﬁcantly and substantially improves fore-
casts of similar-sized events.
• Main driver of this improvement is the simulation of aftershocks of small events.
• Accounting for incompleteness when simulating aftershocks of small events is nec-
essary to achieve this improvement.
• Information about small earthquakes does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the performance
of large event forecasts.
A possible explanation for these results is provided by previous ﬁndings (Nichols and Schoen-
berg, 2014; Spassiani and Sebastiani, 2016; Nandan et al., 2019a; Nandan et al., 2021b),
that earthquakes preferentially trigger aftershocks of similar size.
Our results have potentially signiﬁcant implications for the future of earthquake
forecasting. Thanks to the here-presented algorithms, ETAS models may be calibrated
–22–

--- Sayfa 23 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
for regions with low seismicity where the usual inversion algorithms would fail due to
missing data. To facilitate the embracing of data incompleteness in such cases, our in-
version codes will be made openly available after publication of the article through github.com/lmizrahi/etas
and github.com/lmizrahi/petai.
The newly gained insights from forecasting experiments guide us in the search of
the next generation earthquake forecasting models. Besides other discussed topics such
as anisotropy, temporally or spatially non-stationary background rate (Hainzl et al., 2008;
Hainzl et al., 2013; Nandan et al., 2020), the importance of accounting for short-term
incompleteness when simulating, as well as a magnitude-dependent distribution of af-
tershock magnitudes are emphasized.
Acknowledgments
The data used for this analysis is available through the website
https://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/search/ (U.S. Geological Survey, Earthquake
Hazards Program, 2017). The authors wish to thank Sebastian Hainzl, Andrew Michael
and Andrea Llenos for insightful discussions and helpful feedback on earlier versions of
this article. We also want to thank the editor Rachel Abercrombie, the anonymous as-
sociate editor, one anonymous reviewer, and Max Werner for their constructive feedback
which greatly improved this article. This work has received funding from the Eidgen¨ossische
Technische Hochschule (ETH) research grant for project number 2018-FE-213, “Enabling
dynamic earthquake risk assessment (DynaRisk)” and from the European Union’s Hori-
zon 2020 research and innovation program under Grant Agreement Number 821115, real-
time earthquake risk reduction for a resilient Europe (RISE).
References
Amato, A., & Mele, F. (2008). Performance of the ingv national seismic network from
1997 to 2007. Annals of Geophysics.
Amorese, D. (2007). Applying a change-point detection method on frequency-magnitude
distributions. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 97(5), 1742–1749.
Bach, C., & Hainzl, S. (2012). Improving empirical aftershock modeling based on addi-
tional source information. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 117(B4).
B˚ath, M. (1965). Lateral inhomogeneities of the upper mantle. Tectonophysics, 2(6), 483–
514.
Bray, A., Wong, K., Barr, C. D., & Schoenberg, F. P. (2014). Voronoi residual analysis
of spatial point process models with applications to california earthquake fore-
casts. The Annals of Applied Statistics, 8(4), 2247–2267.
Cao, A., & Gao, S. S. (2002). Temporal variation of seismic b-values beneath northeast-
ern japan island arc. Geophysical research letters, 29(9), 48–1.
Cattania, C., Werner, M. J., Marzocchi, W., Hainzl, S., Rhoades, D., Gerstenberger, M.,
Liukis, M., Savran, W., Christophersen, A., Helmstetter, A., et al. (2018). The
forecasting skill of physics-based seismicity models during the 2010–2012 can-
terbury, new zealand, earthquake sequence. Seismological Research Letters, 89(4),
1238–1250.
Clauset, A., Shalizi, C. R., & Newman, M. E. (2009). Power-law distributions in empir-
ical data. SIAM review, 51(4), 661–703.
Clements, R. A., Schoenberg, F. P., & Schorlemmer, D. (2011). Residual analysis meth-
ods for space-time point processes with applications to earthquake forecast mod-
els in california. The Annals of applied statistics, 2549–2571.
De Arcangelis, L., Godano, C., & Lippiello, E. (2018). The overlap of aftershock coda
waves and short-term postseismic forecasting. Journal of Geophysical Research:
Solid Earth, 123(7), 5661–5674.
Felzer, K. R. (2007). Appendix i: Calculating california seismicity rates. US Geol. Surv.
Open-File Rept. 2007-1437I.
–23–

--- Sayfa 24 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
Field, E. H., Jordan, T. H., Page, M. T., Milner, K. R., Shaw, B. E., Dawson, T. E., Bi-
asi, G. P., Parsons, T., Hardebeck, J. L., Michael, A. J., et al. (2017). A syn-
optic view of the third uniform california earthquake rupture forecast (ucerf3).
Seismological Research Letters, 88(5), 1259–1267.
Gerstenberger, M. C., Marzocchi, W., Allen, T., Pagani, M., Adams, J., Danciu, L., Field,
E. H., Fujiwara, H., Luco, N., Ma, K.-F., et al. (2020). Probabilistic seismic haz-
ard analysis at regional and national scales: State of the art and future challenges.
Reviews of Geophysics, 58(2), e2019RG000653.
Gordon, J. S., Clements, R. A., Schoenberg, F. P., & Schorlemmer, D. (2015). Voronoi
residuals and other residual analyses applied to csep earthquake forecasts. Spa-
tial Statistics, 14, 133–150.
Gordon, J. S., Fox, E. W., & Schoenberg, F. P. (2021). A nonparametric hawkes model
for forecasting california seismicity. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of Amer-
ica, 111(4), 2216–2234.
Guo, Y., Zhuang, J., & Zhou, S. (2015). An improved space-time etas model for invert-
ing the rupture geometry from seismicity triggering. Journal of Geophysical Re-
search: Solid Earth, 120(5), 3309–3323.
Guo, Z., & Ogata, Y. (1997). Statistical relations between the parameters of aftershocks
in time, space, and magnitude. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth,
102(B2), 2857–2873.
Gutenberg, B., & Richter, C. F. (1944). Frequency of earthquakes in california. Bulletin
of the Seismological Society of America, 34(4), 185–188.
Hainzl, S. (2016a). Apparent triggering function of aftershocks resulting from rate-dependent
incompleteness of earthquake catalogs. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid
Earth, 121(9), 6499–6509.
Hainzl, S. (2016b). Rate-dependent incompleteness of earthquake catalogs. Seismolog-
ical Research Letters, 87(2A), 337–344.
Hainzl, S., Christophersen, A., & Enescu, B. (2008). Impact of earthquake rupture ex-
tensions on parameter estimations of point-process models. Bulletin of the Seis-
mological Society of America, 98(4), 2066–2072.
Hainzl, S., Zakharova, O., & Marsan, D. (2013). Impact of aseismic transients on the es-
timation of aftershock productivity parameters. Bulletin of the Seismological So-
ciety of America, 103(3), 1723–1732.
Harte, D., & Vere-Jones, D. (2005). The entropy score and its uses in earthquake fore-
casting. Pure and Applied Geophysics, 162(6), 1229–1253.
Helmstetter, A. (2003). Is earthquake triggering driven by small earthquakes? Physical
review letters, 91(5), 058501.
Helmstetter, A., Kagan, Y. Y., & Jackson, D. D. (2006). Comparison of short-term and
time-independent earthquake forecast models for southern california. Bulletin
of the Seismological Society of America, 96(1), 90–106.
Helmstetter, A., Kagan, Y. Y., & Jackson, D. D. (2005). Importance of small earthquakes
for stress transfers and earthquake triggering. Journal of Geophysical Research:
Solid Earth, 110(B5).
Helmstetter, A., & Werner, M. J. (2014). Adaptive smoothing of seismicity in time, space,
and magnitude for time-dependent earthquake forecasts for california. Bulletin
of the Seismological Society of America, 104(2), 809–822.
Hutton, K., Woessner, J., & Hauksson, E. (2010). Earthquake monitoring in southern
california for seventy-seven years (1932–2008). Bulletin of the Seismological So-
ciety of America, 100(2), 423–446.
Kagan, Y. Y. (2004). Short-term properties of earthquake catalogs and models of earth-
quake source. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 94(4), 1207–1228.
Lippiello, E., Bottiglieri, M., Godano, C., & de Arcangelis, L. (2007). Dynamical scal-
ing and generalized omori law. Geophysical Research Letters, 34(23).
–24–

--- Sayfa 25 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
Llenos, A. L., & Michael, A. J. (2020). Regionally optimized background earthquake rates
from etas (robere) for probabilistic seismic hazard assessment. Bulletin of the
Seismological Society of America, 110(3), 1172–1190.
Lolli, B., & Gasperini, P. (2006). Comparing diﬀerent models of aftershock rate decay:
The role of catalog incompleteness in the ﬁrst times after main shock. Tectono-
physics, 423(1-4), 43–59.
Mancini, S., Segou, M., Werner, M., & Cattania, C. (2019). Improving physics-based af-
tershock forecasts during the 2016–2017 central italy earthquake cascade. Jour-
nal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 124(8), 8626–8643.
Mancini, S., Segou, M., Werner, M. J., & Parsons, T. (2020). The predictive skills of elas-
tic coulomb rate-and-state aftershock forecasts during the 2019 ridgecrest, cal-
ifornia, earthquake sequence. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America,
110(4), 1736–1751.
Marsan, D. (2005). The role of small earthquakes in redistributing crustal elastic stress.
Geophysical Journal International, 163(1), 141–151.
Marzocchi, W., & Taroni, M. (2014). Some thoughts on declustering in probabilistic seismic-
hazard analysis. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 104(4), 1838–
1845.
Marzocchi, W., Lombardi, A. M., & Casarotti, E. (2014). The establishment of an op-
erational earthquake forecasting system in italy. Seismological Research Letters,
85(5), 961–969.
Meier, M.-A., Werner, M., Woessner, J., & Wiemer, S. (2014). A search for evidence of
secondary static stress triggering during the 1992 mw7. 3 landers, california, earth-
quake sequence. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 119(4), 3354–3370.
Mignan, A., Werner, M., Wiemer, S., Chen, C.-C., & Wu, Y.-M. (2011). Bayesian esti-
mation of the spatially varying completeness magnitude of earthquake catalogs.
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 101(3), 1371–1385.
Mignan, A., & Chouliaras, G. (2014). Fifty years of seismic network performance in greece
(1964–2013): Spatiotemporal evolution of the completeness magnitude. Seismo-
logical Research Letters, 85(3), 657–667.
Mignan, A., & Woessner, J. (2012). Estimating the magnitude of completeness for earth-
quake catalogs. Community Online Resource for Statistical Seismicity Analy-
sis, 1–45.
Mizrahi, L., Nandan, S., & Wiemer, S. (2021). The Eﬀect of Declustering on the Size Dis-
tribution of Mainshocks. Seismological Research Letters. https://doi.org/10.
1785/0220200231
Nandan, S., Kamer, Y., Ouillon, G., Hiemer, S., & Sornette, D. (2021a). Global mod-
els for short-term earthquake forecasting and predictive skill assessment. The
European Physical Journal Special Topics, 230(1), 425–449.
Nandan, S., Ouillon, G., & Sornette, D. (2019a). Magnitude of earthquakes controls the
size distribution of their triggered events. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid
Earth, 124(3), 2762–2780.
Nandan, S., Ouillon, G., & Sornette, D. (2021b). Triggering of large earthquakes is driven
by their twins. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.04592.
Nandan, S., Ouillon, G., Sornette, D., & Wiemer, S. (2019b). Forecasting the full dis-
tribution of earthquake numbers is fair, robust, and better. Seismological Re-
search Letters, 90(4), 1650–1659.
Nandan, S., Ouillon, G., Sornette, D., & Wiemer, S. (2019c). Forecasting the rates of fu-
ture aftershocks of all generations is essential to develop better earthquake fore-
cast models. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 124(8), 8404–8425.
Nandan, S., Ouillon, G., Wiemer, S., & Sornette, D. (2017). Objective estimation of spa-
tially variable parameters of epidemic type aftershock sequence model: Appli-
cation to california. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 122(7), 5118–
5143.
–25–

--- Sayfa 26 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
Nandan, S., Ouillon, G., Woessner, J., Sornette, D., & Wiemer, S. (2016). Systematic
assessment of the static stress triggering hypothesis using interearthquake time
statistics. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 121(3), 1890–1909.
Nandan, S., Ram, S. K., Ouillon, G., & Sornette, D. (2020). Is the earth crust operat-
ing at a critical point? arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.06013.
Nanjo, K., Ishibe, T., Tsuruoka, H., Schorlemmer, D., Ishigaki, Y., & Hirata, N. (2010).
Analysis of the completeness magnitude and seismic network coverage of japan.
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 100(6), 3261–3268.
Narteau, C., Byrdina, S., Shebalin, P., & Schorlemmer, D. (2009). Common dependence
on stress for the two fundamental laws of statistical seismology. Nature, 462(7273),
642–645.
Nichols, K., & Schoenberg, F. P. (2014). Assessing the dependency between the magni-
tudes of earthquakes and the magnitudes of their aftershocks. Environmetrics,
25(3), 143–151.
Ogata, Y. (1998). Space-time point-process models for earthquake occurrences. Annals
of the Institute of Statistical Mathematics, 50(2), 379–402.
Ogata, Y., & Katsura, K. (2006). Immediate and updated forecasting of aftershock haz-
ard. Geophysical research letters, 33(10).
Omi, T., Ogata, Y., Hirata, Y., & Aihara, K. (2014). Estimating the etas model from
an early aftershock sequence. Geophysical Research Letters, 41(3), 850–857.
Ouillon, G., & Sornette, D. (2005). Magnitude-dependent omori law: Theory and em-
pirical study. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 110(B4).
Petersen, M. D., Mueller, C. S., Moschetti, M. P., Hoover, S. M., Rukstales, K. S., Mc-
Namara, D. E., Williams, R. A., Shumway, A. M., Powers, P. M., Earle, P. S.,
et al. (2018). 2018 one-year seismic hazard forecast for the central and eastern
united states from induced and natural earthquakes. Seismological Research Let-
ters, 89(3), 1049–1061.
Rhoades, D., Liukis, M., Christophersen, A., & Gerstenberger, M. (2016). Retrospective
tests of hybrid operational earthquake forecasting models for canterbury. Geo-
physical Journal International, 204(1), 440–456.
Rhoades, D. A., Schorlemmer, D., Gerstenberger, M. C., Christophersen, A., Zechar, J. D.,
& Imoto, M. (2011). Eﬃcient testing of earthquake forecasting models. Acta Geo-
physica, 59(4), 728–747.
Rydelek, P. A., & Sacks, I. S. (1989). Testing the completeness of earthquake catalogues
and the hypothesis of self-similarity. Nature, 337(6204), 251–253.
Savran, W. H., Werner, M. J., Marzocchi, W., Rhoades, D. A., Jackson, D. D., Milner,
K., Field, E., & Michael, A. (2020). Pseudoprospective evaluation of ucerf3-etas
forecasts during the 2019 ridgecrest sequence. Bulletin of the Seismological So-
ciety of America, 110(4), 1799–1817.
Schoenberg, F. P. (2013). Facilitated estimation of etas. Bulletin of the Seismological So-
ciety of America, 103(1), 601–605.
Schoenberg, F. P., Chu, A., & Veen, A. (2010). On the relationship between lower mag-
nitude thresholds and bias in epidemic-type aftershock sequence parameter es-
timates. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 115(B4).
Schorlemmer, D., & Gerstenberger, M. (2007). Relm testing center. Seismological Re-
search Letters, 78(1), 30–36.
Schorlemmer, D., & Woessner, J. (2008). Probability of detecting an earthquake. Bul-
letin of the Seismological Society of America, 98(5), 2103–2117.
Segou, M., Parsons, T., & Ellsworth, W. (2013). Comparative evaluation of physics-based
and statistical forecasts in northern california. Journal of Geophysical Research:
Solid Earth, 118(12), 6219–6240.
Seif, S., Mignan, A., Zechar, J. D., Werner, M. J., & Wiemer, S. (2017). Estimating etas:
The eﬀects of truncation, missing data, and model assumptions. Journal of Geo-
physical Research: Solid Earth, 122(1), 449–469.
–26–

--- Sayfa 27 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
Shcherbakov, R., Turcotte, D. L., & Rundle, J. B. (2004). A generalized omori’s law for
earthquake aftershock decay. Geophysical research letters, 31(11).
Sornette, D., & Ouillon, G. (2005). Multifractal scaling of thermally activated rupture
processes. Physical review letters, 94(3), 038501.
Sornette, D., & Werner, M. J. (2005a). Constraints on the size of the smallest trigger-
ing earthquake from the epidemic-type aftershock sequence model, b˚ath’s law,
and observed aftershock sequences. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth,
110(B8).
Sornette, D., & Werner, M. J. (2005b). Apparent clustering and apparent background
earthquakes biased by undetected seismicity. Journal of Geophysical Research:
Solid Earth, 110(B9).
Spassiani, I., & Sebastiani, G. (2016). Exploring the relationship between the magnitudes
of seismic events. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 121(2), 903–
916.
Stallone, A., & Falcone, G. (2020). Missing earthquake data reconstruction in the space-
time-magnitude domain.
Strader, A., Schneider, M., & Schorlemmer, D. (2017). Prospective and retrospective eval-
uation of ﬁve-year earthquake forecast models for california. Geophysical Jour-
nal International, 211(1), 239–251.
Taroni, M., Marzocchi, W., Schorlemmer, D., Werner, M. J., Wiemer, S., Zechar, J. D.,
Heiniger, L., & Euchner, F. (2018). Prospective csep evaluation of 1-day, 3-month,
and 5-yr earthquake forecasts for italy. Seismological Research Letters, 89(4),
1251–1261.
U.S. Geological Survey, Earthquake Hazards Program. (2017). Advanced national seis-
mic system (anss) comprehensive catalog of earthquake events and products: Var-
ious. https://doi.org/10.5066/F7MS3QZH
Utsu, T. (1961). A statistical study on the occurrence of aftershocks. Geophys. Mag., 30,
521–605.
Veen, A., & Schoenberg, F. P. (2008). Estimation of space–time branching process mod-
els in seismology using an em–type algorithm. Journal of the American Statis-
tical Association, 103(482), 614–624.
Wang, Q., Jackson, D. D., & Zhuang, J. (2010). Missing links in earthquake clustering
models. Geophysical Research Letters, 37(21).
Wells, D. L., & Coppersmith, K. J. (1994). New empirical relationships among magni-
tude, rupture length, rupture width, rupture area, and surface displacement. Bul-
letin of the seismological Society of America, 84(4), 974–1002.
Wiemer, S., Giardini, D., F¨ah, D., Deichmann, N., & Sellami, S. (2009). Probabilistic
seismic hazard assessment of switzerland: Best estimates and uncertainties. Jour-
nal of Seismology, 13(4), 449.
Wiemer, S., & Wyss, M. (2000). Minimum magnitude of completeness in earthquake cat-
alogs: Examples from alaska, the western united states, and japan. Bulletin of
the Seismological Society of America, 90(4), 859–869.
Woessner, J., Hainzl, S., Marzocchi, W., Werner, M., Lombardi, A., Catalli, F., Enescu,
B., Cocco, M., Gerstenberger, M., & Wiemer, S. (2011). A retrospective com-
parative forecast test on the 1992 landers sequence. Journal of Geophysical Re-
search: Solid Earth, 116(B5).
Woessner, J., & Wiemer, S. (2005). Assessing the quality of earthquake catalogues: Es-
timating the magnitude of completeness and its uncertainty. Bulletin of the Seis-
mological Society of America, 95(2), 684–698.
Zechar, J. D., Schorlemmer, D., Werner, M. J., Gerstenberger, M. C., Rhoades, D. A.,
& Jordan, T. H. (2013). Regional earthquake likelihood models i: First-order re-
sults. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 103(2A), 787–798.
Zhuang, J., Ogata, Y., & Wang, T. (2017). Data completeness of the kumamoto earth-
quake sequence in the jma catalog and its inﬂuence on the estimation of the etas
parameters. Earth, Planets and Space, 69(1), 36.
–27–

--- Sayfa 28 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
8 Tables
Table 1: ETAS and PETAI parameters inferred for California. First column shows pa-
rameters when constant mc of 3.1 is assumed. Second and third column show parameters
when time-varying mc is accounted for, and fourth and ﬁfth column show parameters
when PETAI inversion is applied. Note that the originally derived parameters are given
in Columns 1, 2, and 4. Columns 3 and 5 show the parameters of Columns 2 and 4,
transformed (as described in Equations 32 - 35) to a reference magnitude of 3.1 to allow
comparison with Column 1. Productivity exponent α = a −ργ and branching ratio η are
not directly inverted but inferred from the inverted parameters.
parameter
mc ≡const.
mc(t)
f(m, t)
mref
3.1
2.4
3.1
2.5
3.1
log10(µ)
-6.86
-5.97
-6.68
-6.35
-6.97
log10(k0)
-2.53
-2.63
-2.36
-2.70
-2.49
a
1.74
1.86
1.86
1.92
1.92
log10(c)
-2.97
-2.52
-2.52
-2.85
-2.85
ω
-0.05
-0.02
-0.02
-0.06
-0.06
log10(τ)
4.03
3.57
3.57
3.92
3.92
log10(d)
-0.51
-0.86
-0.45
-0.76
-0.45
γ
1.19
1.35
1.35
1.22
1.22
ρ
0.60
0.67
0.67
0.67
0.67
log10(tR)
n/a
n/a
n/a
-2.86
-2.86
β
2.33
2.32
2.32
2.37
2.37
a −ργ
1.03
0.95
0.95
1.09
1.09
η
0.94
0.95
0.95
0.93
0.93
–28–

--- Sayfa 29 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
9 Figures
 
detecon 
probability
magnitude
me
event rate
μ
α
k0
ETAS parameters
Figure 1: Simpliﬁed schematic illustration of PETAI inversion.
–29–

--- Sayfa 30 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
start
deﬁne
mc ≡const.
estimate initial
ETAS param-
eters (E) (→
Section 3.1)
initial
ETAS parameters
(E)
estimate ETAS
parameters (E)
with incom-
plete detection
(→Section 3.2)
newly estimated
ETAS parameters
(E)
E
converged*?
newly estimated
ETAS parameters
(E)
and incompleteness
(I = λi, tR, β)
end
yes
start: estimate
incompleteness
(I = λi, tR, β)
deﬁne
λi = 0
∀i
estimate
initial (tR, β)
(→Section 3.4.1)
initial
(tR, β)
estimate (tR, β)
(→Section 3.4.1)
newly estimated
(tR, β)
(tR, β)
converged**?
newly estimated
incompleteness
(I = λi, tR, β)
end incompleteness
estimation
no
yes
start:
estimate rates λi
calculate ξ(ti)
(→Equation 18)
newly calculated
ξ(ti)
calculate λi
(→Equation 26)
newly calculated
λi
λi
converged***?
newly estimated
λi
end rates
estimation
yes
no
no
Figure 2: Flow diagram of PETAI inversion. Caption on next page.
–30–

--- Sayfa 31 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
Figure 2: (Previous page.) Flow diagram of PETAI inversion. Main algorithm starts at
top left and ends at bottom left. The middle column describes the estimation of incom-
pleteness (I
= λi, tR, β) when ETAS parameters (E) are given. Note that the estimation
of (λi)i=1,...,n when ETAS parameters and (tR, β) are ﬁxed requires yet another loop to
obtain self-consistency, as updating λi (step Λ) leads to changes in the inﬂation factor
1 + ξ(ti), which forces one to update (λi)i=1,...,n. This sub-sub-algorithm is visualized in
the right column of the ﬂow diagram. Process boxes are linked to corresponding methods
and equations described in this article.
*, **, ***: Convergence is reached when the estimated values of the kth iteration, ˆak, lie
very close to the estimated values of the previous iteration, that is, if P
a∈A |ˆak −ˆak−1| ≤
θ. Here, A is the set of values that are tested for convergence, *A = E, **A = {tR, β},
***A = {λi, i = 1, . . . , n}. For convergence threshold θ we use *θ = 10−3, **θ = 10−12,
***θ = 1.
Figure 3: ETAS parameters used and inferred in synthetic test 1 (ST1). Black crosses
indicate parameters used in simulation of 400 catalogs, blue crosses indicate median in-
verted parameters. Violins show the distribution of obtained parameters for 400 catalogs,
with orange lines marking the 2.5% and 97.5% percentiles. Note that the y-axis gives the
diﬀerence to parameters used for simulation, the actual values are written next to their
marks.
–31–

--- Sayfa 32 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
Figure 4: Results of synthetic test 2 (ST2). Caption on next page.
–32–

--- Sayfa 33 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
Figure 4: (Previous page.) Results of synthetic test 2 (ST2). (a) Earthquake magnitudes
over time for one example test catalog (blue). Events marked in black were simulated,
but declared as undetected. (b) Cumulative number of unobserved events over time for
the catalog shown in (a). Black line marks the truth, blue line is inferred from the test
catalog using PETAI. (c) Estimated fraction of undetected events versus actually removed
fraction of events, for 3000 test catalogs. Diﬀerent colors indicate diﬀerent assumed de-
tection eﬃciencies. Stars mark the median actual and estimated fraction of undetected
events per tR. Dashed line indicates where actual and estimated fraction coincide, dot-
ted horizontal line indicates the estimated fraction for California. (d) - (n) ETAS and
PETAI parameters inferred in synthetic test. Panel title indicates the parameter name
and in square brackets the value used for simulation. Violins show the distribution of the
parameter inferred from test catalogs per value of tR used, with the value of tR given on
the x-axis in minutes. Crosses indicate median obtained value, blue lines indicate 95%
conﬁdence interval, dashed line indicates the value used for simulation.
–33–

--- Sayfa 34 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
Figure 5: Aftershock Incompleteness in California. (a) Estimated cumulative number of
undetected events over time. (b) Evolution of magnitude-dependent detection probability.
Yellow indicates a detection probability of 50% or less. Black, dark blue, and light blue
indicate detection probabilities of up to 90%, 99%, and 99.9%, respectively. White area
represents detection probabilities higher than 99.9%. (c)-(g) Excerpts of (b) for selected
large events. x-axes are logarithmic and show time since (ﬁrst) mainshock, and range
from 5 minutes to 30 days after that mainshock. Red lines indicate mc(t) as described by
Helmstetter et al. (2006), including the eﬀect of all M
≥
5 events. Colored circles in (g)
represent selected times ti and corresponding magnitude of 99.9% detection. (h) Detection
probability function f(m, λ
=
λ(ti)) snapshots for the times that are highlighted in (g),
plus a time prior to both mainshocks (in red). Time deltas are given with respect to the
M7.1 mainshock. λ(ti) are as estimated during PETAI inversion.
–34–

--- Sayfa 35 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
Figure 6: Evolution of ETAS and PETAI parameter estimates with increasing training
catalog, when using standard inversion with mc = 3.1 (black lines) or mc = 2.5 (orange
lines) and when using PETAI inversion (blue lines). The evolution for tR is only given for
PETAI inversion because it does not exist in standard ETAS. Parameters are with respect
to mref = 2.5, transformed using Equations 32 - 35 if necessary.
–35–

--- Sayfa 36 ---
manuscript accepted for publication in JGR: Solid Earth
Figure 7: From left to right: Cumulative information gain for the alternative models
versus the ETAS null model, mean information gain matrix, and corresponding p-value
matrix comparing all competing models. Matrix entries represent the test of superiority
of Malt (y-axis) versus M0 (x-axis). From top to bottom: target magnitude thresholds mt
of 3.1, 3.5, 4.0, 4.5, and 5.0. Indicated as text in the left panels is the cumulative informa-
tion gain of the ETAS null model versus the STHPP model, and the number of events in
all testing periods combined. Note the diﬀerent y-axes for the left panels. Also note that
the color scheme for the middle panels is diﬀerent between threshold magnitudes mt and
normalized with respect to the maximum absolute mean information gain for that mt.
Color coding for the panels on the right is such that p-values of 0.05 and below are green,
and transition from grey to white between 0.05 and 1.
–36–

--- Sayfa 37 ---
Supporting Information for “Embracing Data Incompleteness
for Better Earthquake Forecasting”
L. Mizrahi1, S. Nandan1, and S. Wiemer1
1Swiss Seismological Service, ETH Zurich
Contents of this ﬁle
• Text S1 Catalog simulation
• Text S2 Forecast evaluation
• Figure S1 Log likelihood of observing the test data for diﬀerent values of tR and b-value,
when current rate is known
1
arXiv:2105.00888v3  [physics.geo-ph]  1 Dec 2021

--- Sayfa 38 ---
Text S1
Catalog simulation
The following algorithm is used to simulate the continuation of a training catalog.
Note that the synthetic catalogs referred to in Sections 4.1 and 4.2 in the article are not continua-
tions of a training catalog, hence generation 0 (deﬁned in the following) consists only of background
events. The locations of these background events are uniformly distributed in the study region. Also
in the case of synthetic catalog simulation, the “testing period”, which is referred to below, is the
period for which one wishes to simulate a catalog. Where diﬀerent models are mentioned, the base
model is used for synthetic catalog simulation.
1. Background events are simulated for the testing period.
• Number of background events is drawn from a Poisson distribution with mean as given
by the ETAS background rate.
• Occurrence times are drawn from a uniform distribution within the testing period.
• Locations are drawn from the locations of events in the training catalog, weighted by
their probability of being background events. The locations are then randomly displaced
by a distance drawn from a normal distribution with mean 0 and standard deviation of
0.1°.
• Magnitudes are drawn from a GR law with exponent β as estimated in the PETAI
inversion (for PETAI and trig only). For the base model and par only, we use the β
estimate obtained when using the formula proposed by tinti1987conﬁdence for binned
magnitude values, using magnitudes M ≥3.1 in the training catalog.
2. The training catalog together with the simulated background events make up generation 0.
igen := 0.
3. Expected number of aftershocks is calculated for all events of generation 0. In the case of the
PETAI and the trig only model, the average number of aftershocks triggered by any event ei
in the training catalog is inﬂated by 1 + ξ(ti).
4. Actual number of aftershocks of each event is randomly drawn from a Poisson distribution
with mean as calculated in the previous step.
5. Aftershocks of the current generation igen are simulated.
• Aftershock time distance to its parent event is randomly generated according to the
estimated ETAS time kernel.
If aftershock time falls out of the testing period, this
aftershock is discarded.
• Aftershock spatial distance to its parent event is randomly generated according to the
estimated isotropic ETAS spatial kernel. If aftershock location falls out of the considered
polygon, this aftershock is discarded.
• Aftershock magnitude is generated according to the GR law with exponent β (same as
for the background events).
6. The newly generated aftershocks now make up the next generation igen + 1.
2

--- Sayfa 39 ---
7. We move on to the next generation. igen := igen + 1
8. Expected number of aftershocks is calculated for all events of generation igen. Continue with
step 4.
The algorithm terminates when no aftershocks fall into the testing period anymore, which is ex-
pected to happen in a ﬁnite amount of time if the branching ratio η < 1.
Text S2
Forecast evaluation
The performance of each model is evaluated by calculating the log-likelihood of the testing data
given the forecast. Speciﬁcally, we calculate the log-likelihood of Ni earthquakes to occur in each
bin bi of a spatial grid of 0.1° latitude × 0.1° longitude. Here, Ni is the number of earthquakes that
actually occurred during the testing period in spatial bin bi.
The log-likelihood for bi is calculated based on the smoothed estimate of the probability of Ni
earthquakes to occur in bi, where the probability estimate is based on the 100,000 simulations of the
model in question. For smoothing we use Gaussian kernels with adaptive bandwidth as described by
nandan2019forecastingfull, with a ﬁxed value of Ω= 3.0. To avoid arbitrary likelihood values
due to extrapolation, we deﬁne a water-level likelihood for event counts larger than the maximum
simulated event count in the respective bin. This waterlevel probability is deﬁned as a uniform
value of 100, 001−1/nextr, where nextr is the number of event counts larger than the maximum
observed and smaller than a generously high maximum possible event count. Symbolically, this
suggests that all other possible event counts could have been simulated in the 100, 001st simulation.
Inevitably, the probabilities for non-extrapolated event counts are proportionally reduced such that
the probabilities of all possible event counts add up to 1.
The total log-likelihood of the testing data is then given by the sum of log-likelihoods over all
bins bi.
Two competing models can be compared by calculating the information gain (IG) of the al-
ternative model Malt over the null model M0, which is simply the diﬀerence in log-likelihood of
observing the testing data. The mean information gain (MIG) is calculated as the mean over all
testing periods. We accept the superiority of Malt over M0 when we reject the null hypothesis
that Malt does not outperform M0. To decide whether to reject the null hypothesis, we perform a
one-sided t-test on the set of IGs for all testing periods. This assumes that the IG values follow a
normal distribution, and we test whether or not the MIG of Malt versus M0 is signiﬁcantly positive.
We reject the null hypothesis when a p-value of less than 0.05 is observed.
The spatially and temporally homogeneous Poisson process (STHPP) model forecasts the same
number of events in all spatial bins. This number of events forecasted, Nfc, is given by
Nfc = Ntrain · Ttest
Ttrain · Nbins
,
(S1)
where ntrain is the number of events observed in the training period, Ttrain is the length of the
training period in days, Ttest = 30 is the testing period length, and Nbins is the total number of
spatial bins. The log-likelihood for the STHPP model is calculated assuming a Poisson distribution
of event numbers with mean Nfc in each spatial bin.
3

--- Sayfa 40 ---
Figure S1: Log likelihood of observing the test data for diﬀerent values of tR and b-value, when
current rate is known. Black cross indicates true values used in simulation, blue cross indicates
maximum likelihood estimators obtained.
4
