
--- Sayfa 1 ---
Forecasting the 2016-2017 Central Apennines
Earthquake Sequence with a Neural Point Process
Samuel Stockman 1, Daniel J. Lawson 1, Maximilian J. Werner 2
1School of Mathematics, University of Bristol
2School of Earth Sciences, University of Bristol
Key Points:
• We construct a new machine learning variant of point processes for short-term earth-
quake forecasting enhanced catalogs.
• The neural point process gains higher forecasting performance from the low mag-
nitude data than ETAS and is faster to train.
• This forecasting performance on the 2016 Central Italy sequence motivates con-
tinued development in this class of models.
Corresponding author: Samuel Stockman, sam.stockman@bristol.ac.uk
–1–
arXiv:2301.09948v3  [physics.geo-ph]  2 Oct 2023

--- Sayfa 2 ---
Abstract
Point processes have been dominant in modeling the evolution of seismicity for decades,
with the Epidemic-Type Aftershock Sequence (ETAS) model being most popular. Re-
cent advances in machine learning have constructed highly flexible point process mod-
els using neural networks to improve upon existing parametric models. We investigate
whether these flexible point process models can be applied to short-term seismicity fore-
casting by extending an existing temporal neural model to the magnitude domain and
we show how this model can forecast earthquakes above a target magnitude threshold.
We first demonstrate that the neural model can fit synthetic ETAS data, however, re-
quiring less computational time because it is not dependent on the full history of the se-
quence. By artificially emulating short-term aftershock incompleteness in the synthetic
dataset, we find that the neural model outperforms ETAS. Using a new enhanced cat-
alog from the 2016-2017 Central Apennines earthquake sequence, we investigate the pre-
dictive skill of ETAS and the neural model with respect to the lowest input magnitude.
Constructing multiple forecasting experiments using the Visso, Norcia and Campotosto
earthquakes to partition training and testing data, we target M3+ events. We find both
models perform similarly at previously explored thresholds (e.g., above M3), but low-
ering the threshold to M1.2 reduces the performance of ETAS unlike the neural model.
We argue that some of these gains are due to the neural model’s ability to handle incom-
plete data. The robustness to missing data and speed to train the neural model present
it as an encouraging competitor in earthquake forecasting.
Plain Language Summary
For decades, the Epidemic-Type Aftershock Sequence (ETAS) model has been the
most popular way of forecasting earthquakes over short time spans (days/weeks). It is
formulated mathematically as a point process, a general class of statistical model describ-
ing the random occurrence of points in time. Recently the machine learning community
have used neural networks to make point processes more expressive and titled them neu-
ral point processes. In this study we investigate whether a neural point process can com-
pete with the ETAS model. We find that the two models perform similarly on computer
simulated data; however, the neural model is much faster with large datasets and is not
hindered if there is missing data for smaller earthquakes. Most earthquake catalogs con-
tain missing data due to varying capability in our detection methods, therefore we need
–2–

--- Sayfa 3 ---
models that are robust to this missingness. We then find that the neural model outper-
forms ETAS on a new catalog for the 2016-2017 Central Apennines earthquake sequence,
which through machine learning detection contains thousands of previously undetected
small magnitude events. We argue that some of this improvement can in fact be explained
by missing data. These results present neural point processes as an encouraging com-
petitor in earthquake forecasting.
1 Introduction
The construction of machine learning algorithms for detecting the arrival times of
earthquake phases (eg. Zhu and Beroza (2019)) combined with an accelerated growth
in the number of seismic sensors, has meant that sizes of earthquake catalogs have grown
substantially (Kong et al., 2019). With the amount of available seismicity data increas-
ing, current forecasting methods that include the full history of the catalog in the form
of all event pairs are increasingly inefficient and might not be flexible enough to incor-
porate this additional data, thus the need for the application of methods developed in
the machine learning community is becoming more apparent. However, there exists a
disconnect between the tools used by statistical seismologists and those in the machine
learning community that apply their methods to seismic data. This work attempts to
bridge that gap (to some extent) by considering a machine learning variant of point pro-
cesses. Point processes are a class of models that contain the Epidemic-Type Aftershock
Sequence (ETAS) model, a widely accepted and used point process model for earthquakes
(Ogata, 1988, 1998; Marzocchi et al., 2014; Mancini et al., 2019). In working with a ma-
chine learning method with a conditional intensity function (the function that explic-
itly defines a point process) (Zhuang et al., 2012), we present a model that is directly
comparable to ETAS models, the current benchmark for short-term earthquake forecast-
ing, yet now with desirable properties such as flexibility and scalability. The machine
learning variant of point processes we introduce are known as neural point processes.
At the heart of neural point processes is the use of a recurrent neural network (RNN)
to learn a compact representation of the history of events, first introduced by Du et al.
(2016). The sequential nature of the way data pass through RNNs makes them an ideal
modeling tool for temporal data. Instead of directly summing over all past events, as in
models based on the Hawkes process (Hawkes, 1971), a fixed length vector representa-
tion of the past is learnt and updated at each new time step. Forecasts can then be made
–3–

--- Sayfa 4 ---
by modelling the conditional intensity function on this vector (Xiao et al., 2017; Li et
al., 2018; Upadhyay et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2019; Omi et al., 2019), or instead through
directly modelling the probability of the next event (Shchur et al., 2019). We direct the
reader to Shchur et al. (2021) for a review of neural point process models. None of these
models, however, are directly suitable for describing the temporal behaviour of seismic-
ity, which includes a continuous mark space for the magnitude of each earthquake as well
as the times. We require a model that is dependent on continuous marks as well as fore-
casts them. To the best of our knowledge, neither of these requirements are satisfied in
the existing temporal point process literature.
In this work we extend the architecture introduced by Omi et al. (2019) so that it may
also deal with earthquake magnitudes. For this we require a model that is dependent on
previous event magnitudes, can forecast subsequent magnitudes as well as forecast earth-
quakes above a threshold magnitude. Distinguishing between a threshold for the input
magnitude and a threshold for the target earthquakes is a problem specific requirement
for earthquake forecasting, so does not exist in other works on temporal point processes.
We choose to extend Omi et al. (2019) to give the most flexible representation of the in-
tensity, since they use a fully non-parametric approach compared to other intensity based
methods that use a semi-parametric approach. Working with the intensity function rather
than directly modelling the likelihood of the next event provides a model that is closer
in interpretation to ETAS and provides a natural way to forecast earthquakes above some
target threshold magnitude, detailed in section 4.2.
Although the use of the ETAS model (Ogata, 1988) has been the dominant way for mod-
elling seismicity in both retrospective and fully prospective forecasting experiments (e.g.
Woessner et al., 2011; Taroni et al., 2018; Cattania et al., 2018; Mancini et al., 2019, 2020)
as well as in operational earthquake forecasting (Marzocchi et al., 2014; Rhoades et al.,
2016; Field et al., 2017), it is restricted to its rigid parametric form. As ETAS only de-
scribes the self-exciting nature of seismicity, it cannot capture any kind of inhibition or
release of stress such as captured by stress-release models (Zheng & Vere-Jones, 1991;
Xiaogu & Vere-Jones, 1994; Bebbington & Harte, 2003) or models based on elastostatic
stress transfer and Coulomb Rate-and-State (CRS) friction (Dieterich, 1994). Further-
more, foreshock activity that differs from ETAS has also been observed (McGuire et al.,
2005; Brodsky, 2011; Lippiello et al., 2012; Ogata & Katsura, 2014). Beyond this under-
standing that ETAS is misspecified, there are also difficulties and inefficiencies with fit-
–4–

--- Sayfa 5 ---
ting and forecasting. To estimate the intensity, ETAS sums over all previous earthquakes,
which requires substantial memory and slows the fitting process and forecasting simu-
lations. For large earthquakes in the past this is important, because their contribution
can last more than 100 years (Utsu et al., 1995). However, for smaller earthquakes par-
ticularly found in enhanced catalogs, one expects the contribution to be close to zero af-
ter a far shorter amount of time, making summing over these terms inefficient (Helmstetter
& Sornette, 2003; Marsan & Lengline, 2008). Furthermore, a particular difficulty with
fitting the ETAS model is that there needs to be a reliable estimate of the completeness
across the time of the catalog and this needs to be incorporated into the model. Fail-
ing to do so will result in biases (Hainzl, 2016b; Zhuang et al., 2017; Seif et al., 2017).
Methods that attempt to do this either truncate the periods of time where the catalog
is most incomplete (Kagan, 1991; Hainzl et al., 2008), leading to parameters that can
be dominated by a few aftershock sequences, or attempt to model the data incomplete-
ness itself (Omi et al., 2014; Hainzl, 2016a, 2016b; Mizrahi et al., 2021b), but this adds
additional computational requirements over a standard ETAS model.
To benchmark our proposed neural point process with ETAS, we design forecasting ex-
periments on both synthetic data as well as a new enhanced catalog for the 2016–2017
Amatrice–Visso–Norcia (AVN) seismic sequence. The catalog generated by Tan et al.
(2021b), containing roughly 900,000 earthquakes, was generated using a deep neural net-
work based phase picker for earthquake arrival times (Zhu & Beroza, 2019). As a result,
the size of the catalog increased 10 fold from the routine catalog generated by the Ital-
ian National Institute of Geophysics and Volcanology (INGV). The INGV catalog has
been used in several retrospective forecasting experiments (Ebrahimian & Jalayer, 2017;
Marzocchi et al., 2017; Mancini et al., 2019, 2022), but there has yet to be much devel-
opment of forecasting models using enhanced catalogs such as this one and, given that
they contain considerably more earthquakes, investigations into how we can harness these
machine learning generated enhanced catalogs are essential. The AVN sequence contains
ten M5+ events during a five month period over an 80 km long normal-fault system (Mancini
et al., 2019). The number of large earthquakes as well as the compactness of the region
on which they occur make this sequence preferable for testing purely temporal forecast-
ing models which contain no spatial covariates. We do still expect some loss of informa-
tion by ignoring the spatial covariates, particularly for smaller earthquakes where there
is a spatial extent across which earthquakes won’t interact.
–5–

--- Sayfa 6 ---
We seek to understand how taking different magnitude thresholds and temporal parti-
tions of our datasets affects the performance of the two models. Through altering these
two aspects, we naturally change the amount of data shown to each model so that we
may see how sensitive their forecasting performance is to training sample size (Wang et
al., 2010). Through partitioning in time we can see how the performance is affected by
the number of major earthquakes that each model is trained on. By altering the mag-
nitude threshold of the input catalog, we seek to improve the predictive skill of forecasts
by using the hypothesis that small earthquakes should help to forecast the moderate-
to-large earthquakes. Either from a time-independent perspective where large earthquakes
are found to nucleate in areas that have a large density of small events (Kafka & Wal-
cott, 1998; Kafka & Levin, 2000), or in time-dependent forecasting (eg. ETAS and CRS)
where earthquake triggering is believed to exist at all scales (Helmstetter & Sornette,
2003; Marsan, 2005; Nandan et al., 2016), reducing the threshold of the input catalog
generally leads to improved forecasting performance of moderate-to-large events (Helmstetter
et al., 2007; Werner et al., 2011; Helmstetter & Werner, 2014; Mancini et al., 2022).
Particularly, Mancini et al. (2022) consider the same sequence as this study, and com-
pare forecasting results from models trained on several different enhanced catalogs (in-
cluding the Tan et al. (2021b) catalog used in this study). They find that the forecast-
ing of M3+ events by CRS and ETAS models is not improved by training on the enhanced
catalogs. When using the same catalog as this study, they see the models increase in per-
formance as the input magnitude threshold is lowered from M5 to M3, but at the low-
est two thresholds M1 and M2, the performance of ETAS is worse than for M3+. Di-
rect comparison of results, however, isn’t possible as they report information gains that
are for spatio-temporal forecasts using the Poisson assumption of earthquake rates in grid-
ded space-time windows. This study hopes to provide some further insight into the per-
formance of forecasting models using the low magnitude earthquakes found in this cat-
alog and presents neural point processes as a competitive model using such events.
2 Data
To benchmark our neural point process against ETAS we conduct forecasting ex-
periments on both real data from the Amatrice-Visso-Norcia sequence as well as synthetic
data generated by ETAS. Since we are making comparisons about temporal models, in
both catalogs, we remove all spatial covariates.
–6–

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Figure 1: The magnitudes and times of the AVN sequence 2016-2017 (Tan et al., 2021b)
used to evaluate the performance of the neural and ETAS model. Marked with a dashed
red line are the times of the 4 major events of the sequence. The size of the points are
plotted on a log scale corresponding to Mw. An estimate of the temporal completeness
M0(t) is plotted using the maximum curvature method (Wiemer & Wyss, 2000).
2.1 Amatrice-Visso-Norcia High Resolution Catalog
On the 24th of August 2016 a Mw6.0 earthquake was recorded near the town of
Amatrice in northern Lazio, central Italy. It was followed by a Mw5.9 near the town of
Visso on the 26th of October and a Mw6.5 near the town of Norcia four days later. Fi-
nally, in January 2017, four events between Mw5.0 and Mw5.5 struck the Campotosto
area. Figure 1 depicts the evolution of this seismic sequence over time.
The INGV produced a routine catalog for the 1 year period containing this sequence
(Chiaraluce et al., 2017). Their catalog contains roughly 82,000 events with a complete-
ness of Mc = 2.3 (Mancini et al., 2019). With the use of a neural network based phase
picker to determine P and S-wave arrival times, an enhanced catalog has been created
for the same earthquake sequence (Tan et al., 2021b). This catalog contains around 900,000
events and has an overall value of completeness of the catalog Mc = 0.2. We estimated
the time varying completeness of this catalog using the maximum curvature method (Wiemer
& Wyss, 2000) with samples of 300 events and can see clear variation in completeness
particularly following large magnitude earthquakes. This approximate method for the
–7–

--- Sayfa 8 ---
completeness is only used to show the variability across the catalog and is not used di-
rectly in any modelling.
2.2 Synthetic Catalog
For the forecasting experiment of synthetic ETAS data, we generate a dataset us-
ing the simulator by Mizrahi et al. (2021a), with uniform background intensity µ and
triggering function,
g(t, x, y, m) =
k0ea(m−M0)
(t+c)1+ω
et/τ
((x2 + y2) + deγ(m−M0))1+ρ .
The ETAS parameters (log10 µ = −6.6, log10 k0 = −3.15, a = 2.85, log10 c = −2.95, ω =
−0.03, log10 τ = 3.99, log10 d = −0.35, γ = 1.22, ρ = 0.51, M0 = 1 Mw) are taken
close to Mizrahi et al. (2021a) with higher background rate to account for the lower M0.
The resulting dataset of roughly 250,000 events comes from removing all the spatial co-
variates.
We also generate a second synthetic dataset from the first by emulating short-term af-
tershock incompleteness using the time-dependent formula from Helmstetter et al. (2006),
M0(M, t) = M −4.5 −0.75 log(t),
where M is the mainshock magnitude. Events below the function are removed using the
six largest events as mainshocks in this synthetic catalog.
3 Theoretical Background
In this section we briefly introduce the theory of neural point processes. We be-
gin with the basic theory of temporal point processes and show how to use this to con-
struct neural point processes for temporal forecasts only. In Section 4, we extend a tem-
poral neural point process to a marked neural process.
3.1 Point Processes
A temporal point process (Daley et al., 2003) is a stochastic process that gener-
ates a sequence of discrete events at times {ti}n
i=1 in a given observation interval [0, T].
The process is characterised by its conditional intensity function λ(t|Ht), which gives the
expected number of events in a small interval about t conditioned on the event history
–8–

--- Sayfa 9 ---
Ht = {ti|ti < t}:
λ(t|Ht)dt = E [N([t + dt])|Ht] .
The intensity function (Rasmussen, 2018) completely defines the point process and can
take a variety of functional forms. The most basic form is the stationary Poisson pro-
cess (Daley & Vere-Jones, 2003) which assumes that all events are independent of each
other, and the conditional intensity function is constant. Self-exciting point processes
assume that events increase the likelihood of subsequent events, with a popular class of
these processes being the Hawkes process (Hawkes, 1971). The Hawkes process is defined
by its conditional intensity λ(t|Ht) = µ + P
ti<t g(t −ti), where g(s) is a kernel func-
tion defining how past events trigger subsequent events.
With the conditional intensity function specified we can write an expression for the log-
likelihood of observing a sequence of events {ti}n
i=1,
log L({ti}) =
n
X
i=1
"
log λ(ti|Hti) −
Z ti
ti−1
λ(t|Ht)dt
#
.
(1)
We assume that the observation interval is [t1, tn] to make the algebra in the remainder
more compact. It is trivial to relax this to an arbitrary interval [0, T].
Temporal point processes can be extended to incorporate marks. A marked point pro-
cess is stochastic process that generates events paired with a mark, {ti, mi}n
i=1 ∈(R>0 × M).
In our setting this represents the occurrence times of earthquakes with their correspond-
ing magnitudes. A marked point process is defined by its conditional intensity function,
λ(t, m|Ht)dtdm = E [N(dt × dm)|Ht] ,
with the log-likelihood of observing a marked sequence of events given by
log L({ti, mi}) =
X
i
"
log λ(ti, mi|Ht) −
Z ti
ti−1
Z
M
λ(t, m|Ht)dmdt
#
.
(2)
3.2 Neural Point Processes
The most common form of neural point processes seeks to obtain a compact rep-
resentation of the event history through the use of an RNN (Du et al., 2016). In this ap-
proach, an input representing the inter-event times τi = ti −ti−1 is first fed into the
RNN. A hidden state hi of the RNN is updated
hi = σ(W hhi−1 + wττi + bh)
where {W h, wτ, bh} are learnable parameters, and σ is an activation function. The con-
ditional intensity function is then formulated as a function of the elapsed time from the
–9–

--- Sayfa 10 ---
most recent event and is dependent on the hidden state of the RNN,
λ(t|Ht) = ϕ(t −ti|hi),
where ϕ is a non-negative function referred to as the hazard function and ti is the time
of the most recent event. To avoid having to numerically integrate the intensity func-
tion directly, Omi et al. (2019) model the integral of the hazard function with a fully con-
nected neural network
Φ(τ|hi) =
Z τ
0
ϕ(s|hi)ds.
With the construction of the model in this way, the log-likelihood of observing a
sequence of event times (1) can be written as:
log L({ti}) =
X
i

log ∂
∂τ Φ(τi|hi) −Φ(τi|hi)

.
4 Methods
Since the neural point process introduced by Omi et al. (2019) is purely temporal,
to model seismicity we must extend their model to our requirements. Particularly we re-
quire that forecasts be dependent on the history of both times and magnitudes, as mag-
nitudes are an important predictor of seismicity (Utsu, 1970, 1971). We also require a
forecast over the next magnitude where, unlike the Gutenberg-Richter law (Gutenberg
& Richter, 1936) routinely assumed in the ETAS framework, this is also dependent on
the history of events. Finally, we require that we may make forecasts of earthquakes above
some target magnitude threshold despite a dependence on earthquakes below that tar-
get threshold. In Section 4.1, we first extend the structure of the neural network by Omi
et al. (2019) to maximise the likelihood of observing a marked sequence of events, in-
cluding constructing a time-history dependent magnitude distribution. In Section 4.2,
we show how we adjust this new structure to target events above a magnitude thresh-
old.
To aid in the development of more flexible forecasting models, we will make both the dataset
and models used in this study available after publication on https://github.com/ss15859/
Neural-Point-Process.
–10–

--- Sayfa 11 ---
4.1 Continuously Marked Neural Point Process
We begin with the factorisation of the joint conditional intensity function into its
marginal intensity and conditional density function, following Daley et al. (2003),
λ∗(t, m) = λ∗(t)f ∗(m|t),
where λ∗(t) is the marginal conditional intensity function of t, and f ∗(m|t) is the con-
ditional density function of the mark at time t. Both of these functions are dependent
on the history Ht, here denoted by the asterisk *. To construct the likelihood for the marked
sequence we model these two functions separately.
With the factorisation, the expression for the log-likelihood of observing the marked se-
quence of events (2) becomes,
log L({ti, mi}) =
X
i
"
log λ∗(ti) + log f ∗(mi|ti) −
Z ti
ti−1
λ∗(t)dt
#
.
(3)
Now with a two dimensional input, the hidden state of the RNN is updated as a linear
combination of the inter-event times and magnitudes. This is the continuous mark ex-
tension to the RNN update from Du et al. (2016),
hi = σ(W hhi−1 + wττi−1 + wmmi−1 + bh),
where wm is an additional learnable parameter.
The marginal intensity function is formulated as a function of the elapsed time from the
most recent event and is dependent on the hidden state of the RNN (Du et al., 2016),
λ(t|Ht) = ϕ(τ = t −ti|hi),
(4)
where ϕ is a non-negative function referred to as the hazard function and ti is the time
of the most recent event. Following Omi et al. (2019), we model the cumulative hazard
function using a fully connected neural network,
Φ(τ|hi) =
Z τ
0
ϕ(s|hi)ds.
which allows us to differentiate this with respect to τ to extract the hazard function. The
derivative is easily obtained through automatic differentiation (Van Merri¨enboer et al.,
2018), which is available in all neural network packages.
We now also formulate the conditional density function of the mark at time t as a func-
tion of the current mark. This is dependent on the time since the most recent event and
the hidden state of the RNN,
f(m|t, Hti) = ψ(m|τ, hi).
–11–

--- Sayfa 12 ---
We again model its cumulative distribution with a fully connected neural network,
Ψ(m|τ, hi) =
Z m
0
ψ(µ|τ, hi)dµ.
Although this integral does not feature in the expression for the log-likelihood, we still
opt for this approach over directly modelling the density function with a neural network.
This follows from work on neural density estimation where positive weights can be en-
forced in the network to capture the positivity and monotonicity of cumulative distri-
bution functions (Chilinski & Silva, 2020). We can then obtain the density function again
through automatic differentiation.
We can now write the log-likelihood as:
log L({ti, mi}) =
X
i
"
log λ∗(ti) + log f ∗(mi|ti) −
Z ti
ti−1
λ∗(t)dt
#
(5)
=
X
i

log ϕ(τi|hi) + log ψ(mi|τi, hi) −
Z ti−ti−1
0
ϕ(t|hi)dt

(6)
=
X
i

log ∂
∂τ Φ(τi|hi) + log ∂
∂mΨ(mi|τi, hi) −Φ(τi|hi)

.
(7)
We model both the cumulative hazard function Φ, and the conditional distribution func-
tion of the marks Ψ, using a feed-forward neural network. The network depicted in Fig-
ure 2 consists of four component parts. The first part is the recurrent section, which finds
an encoding of the history of the point process. The output of the recurrent section hi
passes into two fully connected components. One models the integral of the intensity func-
tion, this is a function of the time of the next event τ. The other component models the
integral of the conditional density function of the next mark, this is dependent on the
next time τ, but is a function of the next mark m.
Since passing long sequences into recurrent neural networks can often lead to exploding
or vanishing gradient problems (Hochreiter, 1998), we do not pass the whole history of
the point process into the recurrent section, but the past d events. This implies that we
use only the past d events to forecast the next event. Thus, this model is learning to es-
timate the intensity given a recent history of d events. This hyperparameter is kept the
same as Omi et al. (2019) at d = 20. A naive tuning search found no significant im-
provement at larger values of {50, 100, 200, 500}. This difference to the full-history ETAS
model is discussed in Section 6.1.
We enforce positive weights in both fully connected sections of the network to capture
the positivity and monotonicity that is required by both cumulative functions. In the
final component of the network we formulate the output as the log-likelihood of observ-
–12–

--- Sayfa 13 ---
Figure 2: The proposed network comprises four sections. First, the inter-event times and
magnitudes of the last d events are fed into a recurrent section consisting of 64 recurrent
units. The output of this section is fed into two fully connected sections where it is com-
bined with the next inter-event time τ for the temporal network and additionally with
the next magnitude m for the magnitude network. The outputs of both these sections
are combined to formulate the log-likelihood of the next inter-event time and magnitude
{τ, m}. We can separate the temporal and magnitude terms in this likelihood to give
point evaluations of the density of the next inter-event time and conditional density of
the next magnitude. The dependence structure of the point process is expressed by the
connections between sections in the network.
ing the pair {τ, m}. To construct this output, one backward pass is performed to cal-
culate the derivatives with respect to the next time and the next magnitude found in eq
(7). This output is exactly what is maximised to learn the weight parameters, during
a second backwards pass.
4.2 Target Events
The growth in machine learning generated catalogs from their predecessors is found
through detecting events of magnitude much lower than previously possible. However,
operationally, we may not care about the forecasting of these smaller events if it is the
larger ones that are the most hazardous. The aim is therefore to use the smaller events
to forecast earthquakes above some target threshold. In this section we outline how this
–13–

--- Sayfa 14 ---
is done for both ETAS and the neural model. We hereafter call events above the target
magnitude threshold Md target events.
Let {(ti, mi)}n
i=1 ∈[0, T]×M be the entire sequence of events, complete down to M0.
We seek to make forecasts of events above magnitude Md. This corresponds to the se-
quence:
{(tj, mj) : mj ≥Md}k
j=1.
To ease in the distinction between ‘all events’ and the target events, we subscript the for-
mer with i and the latter with j.
Let λ0(t, m|Ht) denote the joint intensity function of all events above M0. We seek to
learn the intensity of events above Md, denoted λd(t, m|Ht), where the history Ht con-
tains all events {(ti, mi)}i:ti<t. The ground intensity above the target threshold is found
by marginalising the joint intensity over the target magnitude region,
λd(t|Ht) =
Z ∞
Md
λ0(t, m|Ht)dm.
The log likelihood of target events is then given by:
log L({tj, mj}) =
X
j:mj≥Md
 
log λd(tj, mj|Htj) −
Z tj
tj−1
λd(t|Ht)dt
!
.
For ETAS, the rate above magnitude Md is a fraction of the rate above M0, due to the
independent distribution for magnitudes,
λd(t|Ht) =
Z ∞
Md
λ0(t, m)dm =
Z ∞
Md
fGR(m)dm

λ0(t|Ht) = pd · λ0(t|Ht),
where fGR(m) is the Gutenburg-Richter law and pd is simply the probability that m ≥
Md. Therefore the expression for the likelihood is relatively simple,
log L({tj, mj}) =
X
j:mj≥Md
"
log
 pd · λ0(tj, mj|Htj)

−
Z tj
tj−1
pd · λ0(t|Ht)dt
#
.
For the neural model, we make use of the fact that the integral of the intensity function
between target events, {(tj, mj) : mj ≥Md}k
j=1, can be expressed as a sum of dis-
–14–

--- Sayfa 15 ---
joint integrals between all events {(ti, mi)}n
i=1,
log L({tj, mj}) =
X
j:mj≥Md
"
log λd(tj, mj|Htj) −
Z tj
tj−1
λd(t|Ht)dt
#
(8)
=
X
j:mj≥Md

log λd(tj|Htj) + log fd(mj|tj, Htj)

−
Z tk
t0
λd(t|Ht)dt
(9)
=
X
i:mi≥M0
ti≤tk
"
(log λd(ti|Hti) + log fd(mi|ti, Hti)) I{mi ≥Md} −
Z ti
ti−1
λd(t|Ht)dt
#
(10)
=
X
i:mi≥M0
ti≤tk

log ∂
∂τ Φ(τi|hi) + log ∂
∂mΨ(mi|τi, hi)

I{mi ≥Md} −Φ(τi|hi)

,
(11)
where between (8) and (9) we have factorised the joint intensity of events above Md, λd(t, m|Ht),
into the ground intensity above the target threshold, λd(t|Ht), and the distribution of
the next magnitude above the target threshold given the time and the history, fd(m|t, Ht).
Between (9) and (10) we changed the summation from being over target events to be-
ing over all events by adding the indicator function I{mi ≥Md}. The integral in (9)
becomes the sum of integrals in (10) through a decomposition into disjoint integrals be-
tween all events {(ti, mi)}n
i=1. Thus the neural model may target events by adding the
indicator function I{mi ≥Md} to the expression for the log-likelihood. Now the haz-
ard function models the rate above Md as a function of the time from the last event (of
any magnitude),
λd(t|Ht) = ϕ(τ = t −ti|hi).
4.3 Experimental Design
For both the synthetic data and real data we apply the same training and testing
procedure illustrated in Figure 3. At a fixed point in time along the sequence we set a
marker and train on data up to that point. Following that, the remainder of the sequence
will be used as the test set. For the synthetic catalogs this is done at one single point
in time, whereas for the Central Apennines sequence we make three partitions - each just
before the Visso, Norcia and Campotosto earthquakes. By making these partitions we
can see how the performance of each model is affected by the number of training dat-
apoints as well as the number of major earthquakes.
We seek to understand how different magnitude thresholding affects the performance of
each of the models. For each of the partitions, we look at the performance of both mod-
–15–

--- Sayfa 16 ---
els as the magnitude threshold of the input catalog is lowered, a parameter we refer to
as Mcut. For the AVN catalog and incomplete synthetic catalog, this includes lowering
Mcut into periods where Mcut< M0(t). We keep fixed the magnitude of events we wish
to target at Md = 3 Mw.
Both models are trained by maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) on the training dataset.
For ETAS we use the intensity function defined by Ogata (1988) and maximise the like-
lihood through Nelder-Mead optimisation, chosen for its robustness. For the neural model,
we maximise the likelihood defined in equation (11) through ADAM optimisation (Kingma
& Ba, 2014) written in Tensorflow (Abadi et al., 2015).
We compare the two models’ performance through the log-likelihood of the events in the
testing set. We separate the temporal and magnitude terms in the likelihood equation
(3), to analyse their predictive skills on the two target variables separately. To compare
the performance across different magnitude thresholds, we also fit a homogeneous Pois-
son model. For the temporal log-likelihood we can therefore present the log-likelihood
gain from a benchmark Poisson model, whereas for the magnitude forecasts, simply the
log-likelihood is reported. We shall refer to both performance metrics as log-likelihood
scores and to make general comparisons across the models, we compare the mean log-
likelihood score per earthquake as well as construct a 95% confidence interval to assess
the variability. The confidence interval is constructed with 1000 bootstrap samples of
the log-likelihood scores.
5 Results
5.1 Synthetic Data
Despite the synthetic catalog being complete down to M0 = 1 Mw, we only lower
Mcut down to 1.7 due to the computational time it takes to find the MLE parameters
of ETAS for such a large dataset. Figure 4 shows the computation time (CPU hours)
to train each of the models as a function of the size of the training set using an 2.4 GHz
Intel E5-2680 v4 (Broadwell) CPU. The neural model is significantly faster to train than
ETAS due to the likelihood function not being dependent on the full history of the se-
quence, giving it complexity O(N) (Shchur et al., 2021). ETAS in contrast has complex-
ity O(N 2) due to the double sum in the likelihood.
Figure 5 shows 95% confidence intervals for the log-likelihood scores on the syn-
thetic catalogs for the varying magnitude thresholds. By varying the value of Mcut the
–16–

--- Sayfa 17 ---
Figure 3: The synthetic catalog with an outline of the training and testing procedure.
We train up to a fixed point in time in the catalog, following which the remainder of
the catalog is used for testing. We vary the value of the threshold for the input catalog
(Mcut) and keep fixed the value of the target threshold (Md).
103
104
Training events
100
101
102
CPU Hours to converge to MLE
2
1
NN
ETAS
Figure 4: Time on a single CPU required to train each of the models as the training size
increases. Each model is trained by maximising the likelihood of the training data.
–17–

--- Sayfa 18 ---
size of the training dataset changes, depicted by the green barplots. In Figure 5a) the
temporal log-likelihood scores for both models on the complete synthetic catalog are dis-
played. Although there are fluctuations, there is no significant difference between the two
models’ log-likelihood gain from the same Poisson baseline for all values of Mcut, sug-
gesting the neural model has learnt to capture the ETAS data sufficiently well. Although
the mean of ETAS increases as we lower Mcut, whereas the mean of the neural model
fluctuates, these changes are non-significant. We speculate that we do not see significant
improvement as we lower Mcut due to the fact that we are fitting temporal models to
spatio-temporal data.
Figure 5b) shows the temporal log-likelihood scores for the incomplete synthetic cata-
log. Just as in Figure 5a), ETAS remains constant down to Mcut 2.0. But now, on this
incomplete dataset, the performance of ETAS significantly reduces as Mcut is lowered
below this threshold. In contrast, the neural model remains constant in performance and
significantly outperforms ETAS for all but the highest two thresholds, demonstrating a
robustness to the missing data in this catalog. By synthetically recreating incomplete-
ness we remove many datapoints, therefore we can fit ETAS to a lower Mcut as we do
not experience the longer training times of the complete catalog.
Figure 5c) shows the magnitude log-likelihood scores for the complete synthetic cat-
alog. For the highest two thresholds, the neural model performs significantly worse than
ETAS but then remains marginally worse for all other values of Mcut. For the magni-
tude scores for the incomplete data in Figure 5d), ETAS significantly outperforms the
neural model at the higher thresholds. As the threshold is lowered the two perform more
similarly, owing to an increase in performance from the neural model and a slight de-
crease from ETAS.
We can understand the marginal difference in performance between the two models at
lower thresholds by looking at their respective distributions. Figure 6 shows five instances
of the magnitude distribution learnt by both models at Mcut = 1.7 for the complete cat-
alog. For ETAS we simply learn the b value of the Gutenberg-Richter (GR) law whereas
for the neural model, a history and time-dependent distribution for the next magnitude
is learnt. In these five instances, although the neural model can closely approximate the
GR law, allowing it to be time-history dependent means that its predictions vary across
different occurrences in the sequence and therefore in this synthetic example performs
worse than the stationary data-generating distribution. Since the neural model contains
–18–

--- Sayfa 19 ---
Figure 5: Results from the synthetic tests. 95 % confidence intervals for the log-
likelihood scores for each model as a function of Mcut (the magnitude threshold of the
input catalog). The size of the training set is displayed in the green barplot; the size of
the testing set in the legend. a) temporal log-likelihood gain from Poisson for the com-
plete synthetic catalog. b) temporal log-likelihood gain for the incomplete catalog. c)
magnitude log-likelihood for the complete catalog. d) magnitude log-likelihood for the
incomplete catalog.
–19–

--- Sayfa 20 ---
Figure 6: Five examples of the forecasted magnitude distributions from the complete
synthetic catalog tests at Mcut = 1.7 compared with the ETAS Gutenberg-Richter law.
The magnitudes of the observed events are plotted as points along the log-density for the
neural model.
orders of magnitude more parameters, this result indicates overfitting (Lawrence et al.,
1997).
5.2 AVN Catalog
Figure 7 shows the log-likelihood scores for both models on each of the testing-training
partitions on the AVN catalog, where Figure 7a) is for training both models up to the
Visso 5.9 Mw event, Figure 7b) up to the Norcia 6.5 Mw event and Figure 7c) up to the
first of the major Campotosto earthquakes. Across all training-testing partitions Fig-
ure 7a)-7c), as Mcut is lowered below 3 Mw, the performance of ETAS decreases con-
sistently. The neural model, however, either remains constant in performance or improves
as Mcut is lowered. In addition, as the neural model is trained on a longer period of time,
its performance improves. For higher values of Mcut the neural model performs signif-
icantly worse than ETAS when trained up to Visso, but with the additional training data
leading up to Norcia and Campotosto, it is similar to ETAS. For low values of Mcut, the
performance of the neural model is significantly better than ETAS. When comparing across
–20–

--- Sayfa 21 ---
all values of Mcut neither model is significantly better than the other. Generally, the neu-
ral model is more robust to different values of Mcut than ETAS. Figure S1 of the Sup-
porting Information shows how the fitted ETAS parameters change with Mcut.
The magnitude log-likelihood scores in Figure 7d)-7f) show that the time-history depen-
dent magnitude distribution generally cannot match the predictive power of the station-
ary GR law. The performance of ETAS remains constant for all values of Mcut and testing-
training partitions. In Figure 7d) and Figure 7e) the neural model improves in perfor-
mance as Mcut is lowered, where it only performs closely to ETAS at the very lowest thresh-
old. This and the fact that it performs much closer to ETAS when training up to Cam-
potosto (Figure 7f)) suggests that it is learning and improving when shown more data.
To compare the models’ performance as a function of time, Figure 8 displays the
cumulative information gain (CIG) of the neural model over ETAS, for both models trained
up to the Norcia earthquake. This information gain is simply the difference in the log-
likelihood scores, where we subtract the score of ETAS from the neural model for both
the magnitude and event-time term of the likelihood. The CIG is plotted per earthquake,
but the evolution with time since the Norcia earthquake is also displayed. Figure 8a) shows
the CIG for event time forecasts. Beyond the trend that the neural model improves over
ETAS as we lower Mcut, the improvement varies over the testing catalog. For the thresh-
olds that give the largest gain, (Mcut = 1.2, 1.4, 1.6, 1.8), the period of time with the
greatest amount of gain, indicated by the steepest gradient of the curve, is found within
the first 2 hours of the Norcia earthquake. This is followed by a reduced improvement
up to 24 hours, beyond which it levels out and remains relatively linear.
Figure 8b) shows the CIG for the magnitude forecasts, confirming the loss in average per-
formance of the neural model over ETAS. All thresholds decrease fairly steadily for nearly
all of the testing period, apart from immediately following the Norcia earthquake. For
the lower thresholds the period of time following Norcia sees an improvement over ETAS
very briefly before declining.
Figure 8c) shows the IG of the neural model over ETAS but now as a function of the es-
timate of the completeness of the testing period. Both models are trained up to Norcia
for Mcut = 1.2, 2.0, 2.8. A locally weighted scatterplot smoothing (lowess) regression
(Cleveland, 1979) with 95 % confidence intervals estimates this relationship. For Mcut
= 1.2, the difference between the two models is smallest for intermediate values of the
incompleteness (around M0(t) = 2.0), but for the most complete (M0(t) = 1.0) and
–21–

--- Sayfa 22 ---
Figure 7: Results from tests on AVN catalog. 95 % confidence intervals for the log-
likelihood score of each model for varying values of Mcut. The size of the training set is
displayed in the green barplot as well as the size of the testing set in the legend. a)-c)
depicts the temporal log-likelihood gain from Poisson. In a), both models are trained up
to the Visso earthquake, in b) both models are trained up to the Norcia earthquake and
in c) both are trained up to the Campotosto earthquakes. d) - f) depict the magnitude
term of the log-likelihood for the same training-testing partitions.
–22–

--- Sayfa 23 ---
Figure 8: a) - b) The Cumulative Information Gain (CIG) of the neural model over
ETAS for a range of values of Mcut. The models are trained up to the Norcia earthquake
and the plot depicts the evolution of the CIG from the Norcia earthquake to the end of
the catalog. The curve is plotted per event, however, the actual time since the Norcia
earthquake is displayed on the top axis. a) displays the CIG for event-time forecasts, b)
displays the CIG for magnitude forecasts. c) displays the information gain of the neural
model over ETAS as a function of the completeness of the testing catalog - both models
are trained up to Norcia for Mcut = 1.2, 2.0, 2.8.
most incomplete (M0(t) = 3.0) parts of the testing catalog, the neural model performs
greatest compared to ETAS. At M0(t) = 2.0 where the relative performance of ETAS
is best, the confidence interval for the log-likelihood difference between the two models
lies above zero, centered around 0.75. So, there is no value of completeness in the test-
ing catalog where ETAS performs as well as the neural model. For Mcut = 2.0, the neu-
ral model outperforms ETAS during more incomplete periods of the testing period and
for Mcut = 2.8, ETAS is consistently better across all values of completeness.
–23–

--- Sayfa 24 ---
Figure 9: The forecasted magnitude distribution of each model, a) at the occurrence of
the Norcia earthquake, and b) at the occurrence of the next Mw3+ earthquake following
Norcia.
The forecasted magnitude distribution of each model shown in Figure 9 provides
some insight into the cause of this immediate improvement over ETAS’s GR forecast right
after Norcia. Figure 9a) shows the magnitude distribution of each model at the time of
the Norcia earthquake. The two distributions resemble each other relatively closely. At
the time of the next Mw3+ event, Figure 9b), the neural model has shifted its density
towards higher magnitude values anticipating a lack of observed smaller magnitude earth-
quakes due to catalog incompleteness.
6 Discussion
6.1 Approximating ETAS
The ability to approximate ETAS data using a neural point process is a benchmark
goal. Demonstrating a baseline level of expressiveness is essential before any work on real
data is done. Given other neural point process models regularly use univariate or dis-
cretely marked Hawkes data as a baseline (Du et al., 2016; Omi et al., 2019), this result
provides an example of fit to continuous bivariate Hawkes data.
Specifically, the merit of this fit to ETAS data is that it uses a truncated history of events.
Truncating the ETAS model to sum over only the last d events would dramatically change
the evaluation of the intensity function between a significantly large earthquake d events
–24–

--- Sayfa 25 ---
ago or d+1 events ago, thus instead the way in which to formulate the relationship be-
tween the intensity and these truncated events is learnt. The past d events are exhibit-
ing behaviour based on the events prior and thus we do not directly specify the contri-
bution from events further back in time, instead dependence on such events is learnt in-
directly.
The reduction in the amount of history each forecast is dependent upon drastically im-
proves the computational requirements for both learning and evaluation of the likelihood.
To create forecasting models alongside the growing size of earthquake catalogs generated
through machine learning based phase picking, we require models that scale well with
the data. Shown here is that we can achieve the same predictive accuracy as ETAS (in
a synthetic catalog) but with a smaller computational budget.
6.2 Embracing and Ignoring Data Incompleteness
At the previously explored thresholds of this sequence, (Ebrahimian & Jalayer, 2017;
Marzocchi et al., 2017; Mancini et al., 2019, 2022), the neural point process performs sim-
ilarly to ETAS. The biggest deviations between the two models are found as the mag-
nitude threshold is lowered into new unexplored regions revealed by this enhanced cat-
alog. The deviations come from the fact that the neural model increases gradually in per-
formance as the threshold is lowered whereas ETAS drastically decreases in performance.
Below, we offer an interpretation for these results.
We argue that the largest gains made by the neural model are due to its ability to han-
dle the incomplete data immediately following large earthquakes. There are two justi-
fications for this: Given that the magnitude threshold of the input catalog is lowered into
regions where there are periods when M0(t) > Mcut, we expect there to be biases in
fitting ETAS (Zhuang et al., 2017; Seif et al., 2017; Hainzl, 2016b). The consequences
of these biases on ETAS are reflected in the log-likelihood scores on the synthetic incom-
plete data figure 5b). In this synthetic catalog with short-term aftershock incomplete-
ness, ETAS drastically reduces in performance in contrast to the neural model. Since
a basic ETAS is formulated as completely observing all potentially triggering earthquakes
it poorly captures incomplete sequences. The same shape of plot is found in the real data
in Figure 7a)-c), where the performance of ETAS decreases as Mcut is lowered. In con-
trast, other studies have found decreasing the minimum triggering magnitude improves
the performance of ETAS (e.g., Werner et al. (2011); Helmstetter and Werner (2014)).
–25–

--- Sayfa 26 ---
A consequence of the bias in the ETAS parameters is that the forecasting performance
is only competitive with the neural model during intermediate values of incompleteness,
Figure 8c). Even during complete periods in the testing catalog, since ETAS has been
fit on incomplete data, it fails to forecast well.
The second justification comes through considering the process by which the observed
data are generated, e.g. as described by Omi et al. (2014). The relationship between the
underlying process λ(t|Ht) and the observed process v(t|Ht) that forms the catalog it-
self can be written as
v(t|Ht) = λ(t|Ht) r(t|M0),
where r(t|M0) is the probability of detection at time t. For ETAS variants that deal with
time-varying completeness (e.g. Omi et al., 2014; Hainzl, 2016a, 2016b; Mizrahi et al.,
2021b), this function has to be estimated alongside the parameters of ETAS. When fit-
ting a temporal ETAS model to data with temporal incompleteness, bias in the fitted
parameters comes from the modeling assumption that v∗(t) = λ∗(t). Through the use
of a flexible model such as this neural point process, rather than trying to learn both the
underlying process and the detection rate, we instead directly learn the observed pro-
cess. So in fact, in the construction of the model rather than equation (4), the observa-
tion process is approximated,
ϕ(t −ti|hi) = v∗(t),
where ti is the time of the last event. As we lower Mcut into regions of temporal incom-
pleteness, unlike ETAS, the performance of the neural model does not decrease, Figure
5b). This demonstrates the neural models’ ability to fit to observed data as it is not bi-
ased by an increasing amount of missingness.
Learning to model the observation process requires the assumption that the process of
the incompleteness is stationary for future forecasts, thus if there is new methodology
in data collection, the model would have to be re-trained on this new data. This is sim-
ilar to detection rate based methods, (Omi et al., 2014; Hainzl, 2016a, 2016b; Mizrahi
et al., 2021b), that would also need to update their detection function with new obser-
vational methodology.
To further test the effectiveness of the neural model, a comparison with other ETAS mod-
els that specifically deal with incompleteness is needed. But given that methods that deal
with incompleteness only increase the computational requirements upon fitting a basic
ETAS model, neural point processes could offer a more efficient way to deal with miss-
–26–

--- Sayfa 27 ---
ing data. This is especially important when moving towards using enhanced catalogs such
as the one used here. Temporal variations in completeness must be considered when us-
ing these catalogs and to be able to use these catalogs we must take more care with the
computational efficiency of models.
Although data incompleteness is the most reasonable argument for the significant gains
of the neural point process at low magnitude thresholds, we shouldn’t limit ourselves to
this description. We have reached this conclusion by extrapolating the forecasting re-
sults on synthetic data and through arguments about which statistical process is being
approximated by the neural model. However, we shouldn’t rule out the possibility that
the new low magnitude data in this enhanced catalog has contributed additional signal
that is not explainable by ETAS. Even for the intermediate value of completeness that
results in the best performance of ETAS compared with the neural model, there is still
an average log-likelihood gain of around 0.75, Figure 8c). We can compare this with Fig-
ure S3c) in the supporting information, where on the incomplete synthetic data we see
a truncated curve of the same shape. In this synthetic experiment, there are periods of
completeness where the performance between the two models is comparable, however on
the real data, since there is no value of completeness that results in comparable perfor-
mance, this would suggest that something additional is contributing to the gains. The
question of whether there is additional signal in low magnitude events found in enhanced
catalogs such as this one needs further attention beyond this study. We believe that fur-
ther development in neural point processes will aid modellers in analysing this wealth
of new data as neural models provide more flexible modelling alternatives and can cope
with the scale of new enhanced catalogs.
6.3 Limitations
This study presents a flexible model that does not suffer from the same misspec-
ification as ETAS due to short-term aftershock incompleteness. Although the size of the
gains for these magnitude thresholds is large, we found, however, no significant overall
improvement in forecasting ability over ETAS across magnitude thresholds. Comparing
the value of Mcut that gives the greatest performance for each model finds that although
the mean of the neural model is highest, the gain over ETAS is not significant. In this
two dimensional time-magnitude domain, given the flexibility of this neural network and
the data volume provided, there is insufficient signal in the data to learn anything sig-
–27–

--- Sayfa 28 ---
nificantly better than ETAS. This would suggest that the time and magnitude data from
low magnitude events alone does not give us additional information in forecasting M3+
events. This motivates considering whether additional features can aid in the forecast-
ing ability of neural point processes. Given that operationally we also require spatial fore-
casts, this is an obvious future extension to the model. It is natural to expect that in-
cluding spatial covariates would improve forecasting performance (Utsu, 1955; Ogata,
1998), however, it is not clear that considering them as an additional dimension to the
input of an RNN would learn any spatial structure from the data. Neural point processes
for spatio-temporal data do not utilise RNNs which are primarily sequence encoders and
instead consider models based on Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) (Chen et al.,
2020; Biloˇs et al., 2021). We believe such models should outperform RNN-based mod-
els on spatio-temporal data.
By modelling the magnitudes by a completely unconstrained density that is also time-
history dependent, we create lots of potential for over-fitting to the data (Ying, 2019).
This is exactly what is observed during the tests on synthetic data where we learn a ‘noisy’
Gutenberg-Richter law. It is the likely source for the performance which is on average
worse than ETAS on the AVN catalog. However, by letting this function be unconstrained,
the model was able to make improvements over ETAS immediately following Norcia. This
isn’t too surprising since deviations from a stationary GR law have been observed, ei-
ther through fluctuations of the b-value in space or time (Schorlemmer et al., 2005; Gu-
lia et al., 2018) or short-term aftershock incompleteness (Kagan, 2004; Woessner & Wiemer,
2005; Helmstetter et al., 2006).
A final limitation of the model presented here is its (in)ability to simulate events into
the future. Where simulation of ETAS can be done due its equivalent branching process
formulation, simulation from the neural model can only be leveraged through the inten-
sity function at a given point in time with a thinning algorithm (Ogata, 1981). But given
that calculation of the intensity with a neural point process is much more efficient than
ETAS, it would be quicker to do thinning simulation with a the neural model. Slower
simulation can be overcome by using an alternative flexible formulation of the likelihood
such as the one used in Shchur et al. (2019), however, we would lack the ability to tar-
get earthquakes above a magnitude threshold.
–28–

--- Sayfa 29 ---
7 Conclusion
We present an initial investigation into the viability of neural point processes for
the forecasting of short term seismicity. The neural point process is formulated in a sim-
ilar way to the ETAS model, only with a much more flexible way of representing the in-
tensity function. Now with much larger earthquake catalogs, data-driven point process
models present us with an opportunity to investigate whether these new data may of-
fer some deviation to the parameterization of ETAS as well as providing more compu-
tationally efficient models that are robust to missing data.
We extend the existing point process model of Omi et al. (2019) so that it also models
the magnitudes associated with the events contained in earthquake sequences. We also
show how this model can be used to forecast earthquakes above some target threshold
magnitude through decomposing the cumulative hazard function between target events.
A notable feature of the presented model is that a forecast is only dependent on a fixed
length vector representing the history of events, making the evaluation of the likelihood
scale linear with the sample size.
With an experiment on data simulated from the ETAS model we demonstrate this com-
putational advantage by showing a stark improvement on the time to train the neural
point process against the ETAS model, whilst still obtaining a similar likelihood score
on test data. We find that defining a more flexible time-history dependent magnitude
distribution leads to overfitting and consequentially the magnitude likelihood scores are
worse than when using a stationary Gutenberg-Richter law.
Through artificially removing events from the synthetic catalog we create a dataset that
mimics short-term aftershock incompleteness. We find that on this altered catalog, the
performance of ETAS now decreases as the magnitude threshold is lowered. In contrast,
the neural model remains constant in performance, suggesting that it is more robust to
the missing data found in typical earthquake catalogs.
On real data from the Amatrice-Visso-Norcia sequence the performance of both mod-
els vary with respect to the magnitude threshold of the input catalog. Both models per-
form similarly at previously explored thresholds (Mw3+), but when lowered into mag-
nitude regions revealed by the new catalog, ETAS decreases in performance unlike the
neural point process. We argue that these gains are due to the neural model’s ability to
handle the incomplete data found in this enhanced catalog. This experiment both mo-
tivates the need for considering temporal completeness when using enhanced catalogs
–29–

--- Sayfa 30 ---
and motivates further work into what the spatial covariates of this dataset might offer
when combined with flexible point process models such as this one.
8 Open Research
The Amatrice-Visso-Norcia catalog produced by Tan et al. (2021b) is accessible at
the Zenodo repository https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4736089 (Tan et al., 2021a). The
ETAS simulator used to generate the synthetic data was written for Mizrahi et al. (2021a)
and Mizrahi et al. (2021b), and is available at https://github.com/lmizrahi/etas,
(Mizrahi & Schmid, 2022). Both synthetic and real datasets are found in the reproducibil-
ity package along with the models and the experimental design used in this study (?, ?).
Acknowledgments
This project is funded by Compass - Centre for Doctoral Training in Computational Statis-
tics and Data Science (EPSRC Grant Ref EP/S023569/1). Compass is funded by United
Kingdom Research and Innovation (UKRI) through the Engineering and Physical Sci-
ences Research Council (EPSRC), https://www.ukri.org/councils/epsrc. This project
also has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the Euro-
pean Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement no. 821115,
Real-time earthquake rIsk reduction for a reSilient Europe (RISE), http://www.rise
-eu.org).
References
Abadi, M., Agarwal, A., Barham, P., Brevdo, E., Chen, Z., Citro, C., . . . Zheng,
X.
(2015).
TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous sys-
tems.
Retrieved from http://tensorflow.org/
(Software available from
tensorflow.org)
Bebbington, M., & Harte, D.
(2003).
The linked stress release model for spatio-
temporal seismicity: formulations, procedures and applications.
Geophysical
Journal International, 154(3), 925–946.
Biloˇs, M., Sommer, J., Rangapuram, S. S., Januschowski, T., & G¨unnemann, S.
(2021).
Neural flows: Efficient alternative to neural odes.
Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 34, 21325–21337.
Brodsky, E. E. (2011). The spatial density of foreshocks. Geophysical Research Let-
–30–

--- Sayfa 31 ---
ters, 38(10).
Cattania, C., Werner, M. J., Marzocchi, W., Hainzl, S., Rhoades, D., Gerstenberger,
M., . . . others (2018). The forecasting skill of physics-based seismicity models
during the 2010–2012 canterbury, new zealand, earthquake sequence.
Seismo-
logical Research Letters, 89(4), 1238–1250.
Chen, R. T., Amos, B., & Nickel, M. (2020). Neural spatio-temporal point processes.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.04583.
Chiaraluce, L., Di Stefano, R., Tinti, E., Scognamiglio, L., Michele, M., Casarotti,
E., . . . others
(2017).
The 2016 central italy seismic sequence: A first look
at the mainshocks, aftershocks, and source models.
Seismological Research
Letters, 88(3), 757–771.
Chilinski, P., & Silva, R. (2020). Neural likelihoods via cumulative distribution func-
tions. In Conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence (pp. 420–429).
Cleveland, W. S. (1979). Robust locally weighted regression and smoothing scatter-
plots. Journal of the American statistical association, 74(368), 829–836.
Daley, D. J., & Vere-Jones, D.
(2003).
Basic properties of the poisson process.
An
Introduction to the Theory of Point Processes: Volume I: Elementary Theory
and Methods, 19–40.
Daley, D. J., Vere-Jones, D., et al.
(2003).
An introduction to the theory of point
processes: volume i: elementary theory and methods. Springer.
Dieterich, J.
(1994).
A constitutive law for rate of earthquake production and its
application to earthquake clustering.
Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid
Earth, 99(B2), 2601–2618.
Du, N., Dai, H., Trivedi, R., Upadhyay, U., Gomez-Rodriguez, M., & Song, L.
(2016).
Recurrent marked temporal point processes: Embedding event his-
tory to vector.
In Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd international conference
on knowledge discovery and data mining (pp. 1555–1564).
Ebrahimian, H., & Jalayer, F.
(2017).
Robust seismicity forecasting based on
bayesian parameter estimation for epidemiological spatio-temporal aftershock
clustering models. Scientific reports, 7(1), 1–15.
Field, E. H., Jordan, T. H., Page, M. T., Milner, K. R., Shaw, B. E., Dawson, T. E.,
. . . others
(2017).
A synoptic view of the third uniform california earthquake
rupture forecast (ucerf3). Seismological Research Letters, 88(5), 1259–1267.
–31–

--- Sayfa 32 ---
Gulia, L., Rinaldi, A. P., Tormann, T., Vannucci, G., Enescu, B., & Wiemer, S.
(2018).
The effect of a mainshock on the size distribution of the aftershocks.
Geophysical Research Letters, 45(24), 13–277.
Gutenberg, B., & Richter, C. F. (1936). Magnitude and energy of earthquakes. Sci-
ence, 83(2147), 183–185.
Hainzl, S.
(2016a).
Apparent triggering function of aftershocks resulting from rate-
dependent incompleteness of earthquake catalogs.
Journal of Geophysical Re-
search: Solid Earth, 121(9), 6499–6509.
Hainzl, S. (2016b). Rate-dependent incompleteness of earthquake catalogs. Seismo-
logical Research Letters, 87(2A), 337–344.
Hainzl, S., Christophersen, A., & Enescu, B.
(2008).
Impact of earthquake rup-
ture extensions on parameter estimations of point-process models.
Bulletin of
the Seismological Society of America, 98(4), 2066–2072.
Hawkes, A. G. (1971). Spectra of some self-exciting and mutually exciting point pro-
cesses. Biometrika, 58(1), 83–90.
Helmstetter, A., Kagan, Y., & Jackson, D. (2007). High-resolution time-independent
grid-based forecast for m¿= 5 earthquakes in california. Seismological Research
Letters, 78(1), 78–86.
Helmstetter, A., Kagan, Y. Y., & Jackson, D. D. (2006). Comparison of short-term
and time-independent earthquake forecast models for southern california.
Bul-
letin of the Seismological Society of America, 96(1), 90–106.
Helmstetter, A., & Sornette, D.
(2003).
Importance of direct and indirect trig-
gered seismicity in the etas model of seismicity.
Geophysical Research Letters,
30(11).
Helmstetter, A., & Werner, M. J. (2014). Adaptive smoothing of seismicity in time,
space, and magnitude for time-dependent earthquake forecasts for california.
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 104(2), 809–822.
Hochreiter, S. (1998). The vanishing gradient problem during learning recurrent neu-
ral nets and problem solutions. International Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness
and Knowledge-Based Systems, 6(02), 107–116.
Huang, H., Wang, H., & Mak, B.
(2019).
Recurrent poisson process unit for speech
recognition.
In Proceedings of the aaai conference on artificial intelligence
(Vol. 33, pp. 6538–6545).
–32–

--- Sayfa 33 ---
Kafka, A. L., & Levin, S. Z.
(2000).
Does the spatial distribution of smaller earth-
quakes delineate areas where larger earthquakes are likely to occur? Bulletin of
the Seismological Society of America, 90(3), 724–738.
Kafka, A. L., & Walcott, J. R.
(1998).
How well does the spatial distribution of
smaller earthquakes forecast the locations of larger earthquakes in the north-
eastern united states? Seismological Research Letters, 69(5), 428–440.
Kagan, Y. Y. (1991). Likelihood analysis of earthquake catalogues. Geophysical jour-
nal international, 106(1), 135–148.
Kagan, Y. Y.
(2004).
Short-term properties of earthquake catalogs and models
of earthquake source.
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 94(4),
1207–1228.
Kingma, D. P., & Ba, J. (2014). Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1412.6980.
Kong, Q., Trugman, D. T., Ross, Z. E., Bianco, M. J., Meade, B. J., & Gerstoft, P.
(2019). Machine learning in seismology: Turning data into insights. Seismolog-
ical Research Letters, 90(1), 3–14.
Lawrence, S., Giles, C. L., & Tsoi, A. C. (1997). Lessons in neural network training:
Overfitting may be harder than expected. In Aaai/iaai (pp. 540–545).
Li, S., Xiao, S., Zhu, S., Du, N., Xie, Y., & Song, L. (2018). Learning temporal point
processes via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.05016.
Lippiello, E., Marzocchi, W., De Arcangelis, L., & Godano, C. (2012). Spatial organ-
ization of foreshocks as a tool to forecast large earthquakes.
Scientific reports,
2(1), 1–6.
Mancini, S., Segou, M., Werner, M., & Cattania, C. (2019). Improving physics-based
aftershock forecasts during the 2016–2017 central italy earthquake cascade.
Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 124(8), 8626–8643.
Mancini, S., Segou, M., Werner, M., Parsons, T., Beroza, G., & Chiaraluce, L.
(2022).
On the use of high-resolution and deep-learning seismic catalogs for
short-term earthquake forecasts: Potential benefits and current limitations.
Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, e2022JB025202.
Mancini, S., Segou, M., Werner, M. J., & Parsons, T.
(2020).
The predictive skills
of elastic coulomb rate-and-state aftershock forecasts during the 2019 ridge-
crest, california, earthquake sequence.
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of
–33–

--- Sayfa 34 ---
America, 110(4), 1736–1751.
Marsan, D.
(2005).
The role of small earthquakes in redistributing crustal elastic
stress. Geophysical Journal International, 163(1), 141–151.
Marsan, D., & Lengline, O. (2008). Extending earthquakes’ reach through cascading.
Science, 319(5866), 1076–1079.
Marzocchi, W., Lombardi, A. M., & Casarotti, E.
(2014).
The establishment of an
operational earthquake forecasting system in italy. Seismological Research Let-
ters, 85(5), 961–969.
Marzocchi, W., Taroni, M., & Falcone, G. (2017). Earthquake forecasting during the
complex amatrice-norcia seismic sequence. Science advances, 3(9), e1701239.
McGuire, J. J., Boettcher, M. S., & Jordan, T. H. (2005). Foreshock sequences and
short-term earthquake predictability on east pacific rise transform faults.
Na-
ture, 434(7032), 457–461.
Mizrahi, L., Nandan, S., & Wiemer, S.
(2021a).
The effect of declustering on the
size distribution of mainshocks. Seismological Society of America, 92(4), 2333–
2342.
Mizrahi, L., Nandan, S., & Wiemer, S. (2021b). Embracing data incompleteness for
better earthquake forecasting.
Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth,
126(12), e2021JB022379.
Mizrahi, L., & Schmid, N. (2022). lmizrahi/etas [Software]. Zenodo. Retrieved from
https://zenodo.org/record/6951562
Nandan, S., Ouillon, G., Woessner, J., Sornette, D., & Wiemer, S.
(2016).
System-
atic assessment of the static stress triggering hypothesis using interearthquake
time statistics.
Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 121(3), 1890–
1909.
Ogata, Y. (1981). On lewis’ simulation method for point processes. IEEE transac-
tions on information theory, 27(1), 23–31.
Ogata, Y.
(1988).
Statistical models for earthquake occurrences and residual
analysis for point processes.
Journal of the American Statistical association,
83(401), 9–27.
Ogata, Y. (1998). Space-time point-process models for earthquake occurrences. An-
nals of the Institute of Statistical Mathematics, 50(2), 379–402.
Ogata, Y., & Katsura, K.
(2014).
Comparing foreshock characteristics and fore-
–34–

--- Sayfa 35 ---
shock forecasting in observed and simulated earthquake catalogs.
Journal of
Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 119(11), 8457–8477.
Omi, T., Ogata, Y., Hirata, Y., & Aihara, K.
(2014).
Estimating the etas model
from an early aftershock sequence.
Geophysical Research Letters, 41(3), 850–
857.
Omi, T., ueda, n., & Aihara, K.
(2019).
Fully neural network based model for
general temporal point processes.
In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelz-
imer, F. d'Alch´e-Buc, E. Fox, & R. Garnett (Eds.), Advances in neural in-
formation processing systems (Vol. 32, pp. 2122–2132).
Curran Associates,
Inc.
Retrieved from https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/
39e4973ba3321b80f37d9b55f63ed8b8-Paper.pdf
Rasmussen, J. G.
(2018).
Lecture notes: Temporal point processes and the condi-
tional intensity function. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.00221.
Rhoades, D., Liukis, M., Christophersen, A., & Gerstenberger, M.
(2016).
Retro-
spective tests of hybrid operational earthquake forecasting models for canter-
bury. Geophysical Journal International, 204(1), 440–456.
Schorlemmer, D., Wiemer, S., & Wyss, M. (2005). Variations in earthquake-size dis-
tribution across different stress regimes. Nature, 437(7058), 539–542.
Seif, S., Mignan, A., Zechar, J. D., Werner, M. J., & Wiemer, S. (2017). Estimating
etas: The effects of truncation, missing data, and model assumptions.
Journal
of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 122(1), 449–469.
Shchur, O., Biloˇs, M., & G¨unnemann, S. (2019). Intensity-free learning of temporal
point processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.12127.
Shchur, O., T¨urkmen, A. C., Januschowski, T., & G¨unnemann, S.
(2021).
Neural
temporal point processes: A review. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.03528.
Tan, Y. J., Waldhauser, F., Ellsworth, W. L., Zhang, M., Zhu, W., Michele, M., . . .
Segou, M.
(2021a).
Machine-learning-based high-resolution earthquake catalog
for the 2016–2017 central italy sequence [Dataset].
Zenodo.
Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4736089
Tan, Y. J., Waldhauser, F., Ellsworth, W. L., Zhang, M., Zhu, W., Michele, M., . . .
Segou, M.
(2021b).
Machine-learning-based high-resolution earthquake cata-
log reveals how complex fault structures were activated during the 2016–2017
central italy sequence. The Seismic Record, 1(1), 11–19.
–35–

--- Sayfa 36 ---
Taroni, M., Marzocchi, W., Schorlemmer, D., Werner, M. J., Wiemer, S., Zechar,
J. D., . . . Euchner, F.
(2018).
Prospective csep evaluation of 1-day, 3-month,
and 5-yr earthquake forecasts for italy.
Seismological Research Letters, 89(4),
1251–1261.
Upadhyay, U., De, A., & Gomez-Rodriguez, M. (2018). Deep reinforcement learning
of marked temporal point processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.09360.
Utsu, T. (1955). A relation between the area of after-shock region and the energy of
main-shock. J. Seismol. Soc. Jpn., 2, 7, 233–240.
Utsu, T. (1970). Aftershocks and earthquake statistics (1): Some parameters which
characterize an aftershock sequence and their interrelations.
Journal of the
Faculty of Science, Hokkaido University. Series 7, Geophysics, 3(3), 129–195.
Utsu, T.
(1971).
Aftershocks and earthquake statistics (2): further investigation
of aftershocks and other earthquake sequences based on a new classification of
earthquake sequences.
Journal of the Faculty of Science, Hokkaido University.
Series 7, Geophysics, 3(4), 197–266.
Utsu, T., Ogata, Y., et al.
(1995).
The centenary of the omori formula for a decay
law of aftershock activity. Journal of Physics of the Earth, 43(1), 1–33.
Van Merri¨enboer, B., Breuleux, O., Bergeron, A., & Lamblin, P. (2018). Automatic
differentiation in ml: Where we are and where we should be going.
Advances
in neural information processing systems, 31.
Wang, Q., Schoenberg, F. P., & Jackson, D. D.
(2010).
Standard errors of parame-
ter estimates in the etas model.
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of Amer-
ica, 100(5A), 1989–2001.
Werner, M. J., Helmstetter, A., Jackson, D. D., & Kagan, Y. Y.
(2011).
High-
resolution long-term and short-term earthquake forecasts for california.
Bul-
letin of the Seismological Society of America, 101(4), 1630–1648.
Wiemer, S., & Wyss, M. (2000). Minimum magnitude of completeness in earthquake
catalogs: Examples from alaska, the western united states, and japan. Bulletin
of the Seismological Society of America, 90(4), 859–869.
Woessner, J., Hainzl, S., Marzocchi, W., Werner, M., Lombardi, A., Catalli, F., . . .
Wiemer, S.
(2011).
A retrospective comparative forecast test on the 1992
landers sequence. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 116(B5).
Woessner, J., & Wiemer, S.
(2005).
Assessing the quality of earthquake catalogues:
–36–

--- Sayfa 37 ---
Estimating the magnitude of completeness and its uncertainty.
Bulletin of the
Seismological Society of America, 95(2), 684–698.
Xiao, S., Yan, J., Yang, X., Zha, H., & Chu, S. (2017). Modeling the intensity func-
tion of point process via recurrent neural networks.
In Proceedings of the aaai
conference on artificial intelligence (Vol. 31).
Xiaogu, Z., & Vere-Jones, D. (1994). Further applications of the stochastic stress re-
lease model to historical earthquake data. Tectonophysics, 229(1-2), 101–121.
Ying, X. (2019). An overview of overfitting and its solutions. In Journal of physics:
Conference series (Vol. 1168, p. 022022).
Zheng, X.-G., & Vere-Jones, D.
(1991).
Application of stress release models to
historical earthquakes from north china. Pure and Applied Geophysics, 135(4),
559–576.
Zhu, W., & Beroza, G. C.
(2019).
Phasenet: a deep-neural-network-based seismic
arrival-time picking method.
Geophysical Journal International, 216(1), 261–
273.
Zhuang, J., Ogata, Y., & Wang, T.
(2017).
Data completeness of the kumamoto
earthquake sequence in the jma catalog and its influence on the estimation of
the etas parameters. Earth, Planets and Space, 69(1), 1–12.
Zhuang, J., Werner, M. J., Hainzl, S., Harte, D., & Zhou, S. (2012). Basic models of
seismicity: temporal models.
Community Online Resource for Statistical Seis-
micity Analysis.
–37–
