
--- Sayfa 1 ---
USING SEISMIC STATISTICAL FEATURES AND VQ-VAE TO
IMPROVE SPATIOTEMPORAL SEISMICITY PREDICTABILITY
Wei Quan, Denise Gorse
Department of Computer Science
University College London
{d.gorse, wei.quan}@cs.ucl.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
In this paper we build upon a previous study in which we demonstrated, using XGBoost and
earthquake catalogue data from Japan and Chile, that a set of 60 seismic statistical features (SSFs)
had much greater predictive value than a set of 428 generic time series features from the tsfresh
package. We here extend this previous work in two key ways, focusing on data from Japan as a
large dataset is necessary in order to allow for the training of a deep learning (autoencoder) model.
First, we move from whole-region prediction (considering, for each candidate event, the likelihood
of an event M ≥5.0 anywhere in the region in the next 15 days) to localised predictions in which
both the region of feature computation and the region of prediction are restricted to a circle of radius
24 km around the candidate event, and we show that performance remains excellent, similar to our
previous whole-region study for the same area. Second, we here couple this proven set of SSFs, based
on one-dimensional (catalogue) data, with a novel feature based on two-dimensional seismic maps,
obtained by training a VQ-VAE model to reproduce such maps as output and identifying a measure
of its error in doing so with a localised build-up of crustal stress. We show that while localised
prediction based on SSFs can be effective alone, with test AUC values as high as those obtained
in the case of Japan in our previous whole-region study, the inclusion of the new natively-spatial
VQ-VAE-derived feature, top-ranked by SHAP analysis, can enhance performance and additionally
appears to near-wholly replace the traditionally-computed b-value in terms of feature usage.
Keywords Seismology · Seismic statistical features · Spatiotemporal prediction · Deep learning · VQ-VAE
1
Introduction
The effective prediction of earthquakes (ideally providing tight constraints on both probable location and probable time)
has been a long-sought goal, but the problem presents challenges so severe that some have doubted that it will ever be
achievable [1]. In substantial part the challenge is due to the impossibility, for the foreseeable future, of making direct
measurements of crustal stress at the depths at which earthquakes are initiated. Thus, proxies of building seismic stress
have been sought, ideally ones sufficiently strongly related to subsequent fault movement that they could allow for the
forecasting of future seismicity. Predominant among these ‘seismic statistical features’ (SSFs) has been the b-value, the
slope parameter derived from the Gutenberg-Richter law [2],
log10N(M) = a −bM,
(1)
where N(M) is the number of earthquakes with a magnitude greater than or equal to M, and a and b are constants. The
b-value, the relative frequency of small to large earthquakes, takes a global average value of around 1.0 (1.02 ± 0.03),
but can vary from 0.3 to 2.5 or greater [3] with a localised drop in the b-value often asserted to be predictive of an
imminent large seismic event. There have been a number of ‘labquake’ studies, for example [4], that strongly support
this use of the b-value as a measure of the build-up of stress on a fault, and many studies also of the behaviour of
the b-value in the lead-up to a major seismic event, for example [5], [6]. However, these latter studies, outside of a
arXiv:2606.10069v2  [cs.LG]  11 Jun 2026

--- Sayfa 2 ---
Using Seismic Statistical Features and VQ-VAE to Improve Spatiotemporal Seismicity Predictability
laboratory setting, have not been unambiguous in their conclusions. Earthquakes are not always preceded by localised
drops in the b-value, and localised drops in the b-value are not always followed closely by a seismic event, as pointed
out in [7] and [8], which are equivocal about the value of b, and in [9] and [5], which are sceptical. There could be
many confounding factors that might influence the utility of the feature. Most importantly, the b-value appears best used
to assess the build-up of stress associated with a specific fault system, as in the Foreshock Traffic Light System (FTLS)
of Gulia and Wiemer [10], [11], not as a means to attempt to predict seismic activity more widely. This last explains
why the b-value is not usually ranked highly in region-wide studies such as [12], [13], [14], [15].
This lack of apparent utility of the b-value was notable also in our own previous work [16], upon which this current
paper builds, where for the Japanese dataset b appeared nowhere among the top 20 features obtained by SHAP analysis.
However, as discussed in Section 4.3, we noted that when prediction was restricted to progressively smaller circular
regions centred on a preceding event of interest the situation was very different, with smaller prediction radii boosting
the SHAP value ranking of b. In fact this phenomenon, in line with the successful localised usage of the b-value in the
FTLS system [10], [11], was so notable that it led to the construction of a novel and effective feature, a b-value analogue
we name VQ-VAE-b, derived from deep learning. This new feature, derived from an assessment of the difficulty faced
by a VQ-VAE autoencoder in reconstructing magnitude-stratified spatiotemporal maps of seismicity, will be shown to
be the overall most effective feature in the prediction of seismicity.
Even so, we do not study the potential utility of the b-value or its novel analogue alone. It is only one of a large class
of SSFs that can be derived from earthquake catalogue data. There has been sufficient work done in whole-region
earthquake prediction based on machine learning, discussed in Section 3.2.1 and including our own previous work [16],
to indicate the potential value of many of these others, as well as some single-feature studies of the z-value [17], [18], a
measure of seismic rate change introduced by Habermann [19] and included in our SSF set. We note that these z-value
studies have shown similar conflicting results as many single-feature b-value studies, which is probably not surprising.
Earthquake prediction in a broad context is extraordinarily difficult, and if the problem is ever to be solved it is unlikely
to be via the observation of the behaviour of any single feature. Additionally, from the perspective of machine learning,
which is our perspective, it makes most sense to include all potentially relevant information in the feature set, and let
the model decide what it can make use of; human intuition often introduces bias.
In summary, our paper will:
• Demonstrate, using the seismic statistical features whose value was evidenced in our previous work [16], that
SSF-based prediction can be used in a spatiotemporal context, specifically asking whether an event of interest
will be followed by a future event of a certain magnitude (here, an earthquake of magnitude M ≥5.0 within
15 days), within a certain distance (here, a circle of radius R).
• Propose a novel feature generated by the use of a VQ-VAE deep learning model, a b-value analogue that in a
different way measures the build-up of localised crustal stress that may lead to an earthquake.
The paper will be organised as follow. Following this Introduction section, in Section 2 we briefly review some
necessary background in terms of the two basic components of our model, seismic statistical features (SSFs) in Section
2.1 and VQ-VAE in Section 2.2. We then move on in Section 3 to first consider previous papers that apply VQ-VAE
in any branch of seismology (Section 3.1), then review SSF-based earthquake prediction in Section 3.2. There, we
consider region-wide (Section 3.2.1), geographically restricted (Section 3.2.2), and in Section 3.2.3 those types of
more localised prediction that are closest to the work of this paper. Section 4 explains our methodology, considering in
Section 4.1 the specific means by which spatiotemporal prediction is enabled (temporary circles of prediction that can
open and close anywhere rather than a fixed grid as in the work reviewed in Section 3.2.3), and our dataset (Section
4.2). Finally, Sections 4.3, 4.4, and 4.5 of the methodology section present the motivation for and means of use of a
VQ-VAE model to construct a novel b-value analogue feature. Our results are presented in Section 5, comprising the
predictive performance of the two variants of our model, with and without the new VQ-VAE feature (Section 5.1), a case
study of the March 2022 Fukushima earthquake (Section 5.2), and in Section 5.4 an assessment of model performance
on a declustered dataset, showing that the model’s good performance is not due to over-reliance on the prediction of
aftershocks. Finally, in Section 6, we review our main findings in this paper and make some suggestions for future work.
Before moving on, a note about our use of the word ‘prediction’ and our framing of the problem as one of earthquake
prediction. In order to discover whether some feature or features (b, the new b-value analogue, or more likely some
combination of these with others from the SSF feature set), may have a use as a meaningful proxy for subsurface
processes leading to an earthquake, it is necessary to frame a specific hypothesis that can be disproven, using a dataset
large enough to allow for statistical rigour. Otherwise results will remain anecdotal, the topic of debates that cannot be
easily resolved. It is problematic to see how the hypothesis to be tested could be other than whether these features could
allow a future seismic event to be predicted from them. However, this does not mean we are attempting operational
earthquake prediction, which we consider premature, using these methods, at this time.
2

--- Sayfa 3 ---
Using Seismic Statistical Features and VQ-VAE to Improve Spatiotemporal Seismicity Predictability
2
Background
2.1
Seismic statistical features
Seismic statistical features (SSFs) are, generically, any quantities that can be calculated from earthquake catalogue time
series, which list event ID, time, magnitude, epicentral location (latitude and longitude), and hypocentral depth. All of
the better-known SSFs, used in the vast majority of works in this field, use only time and magnitude in their computation,
and time usually only as a means to determine which events succeed or precede others, or to answer simple questions
such as ‘what was the largest magnitude event experienced in the last seven days?’ or ‘over how many days did the
last N (where N is typically 50 or 100) events occur?’ There are clearly uses that can be made of other catalogue
information: for example, Picozzi et al. [20] studying preparatory behaviours in the years preceding the 2009 Mw
6.3 L’Aquila earthquake, make successful use of a 3D hypocentral volume feature requiring all of latitude, longitude,
and depth, and Hu et al. [21] use lunar date, on the basis of past works suggesting tidal effects may be associated
with earthquake nucleation. But for the SSF component of this work we will follow the classic path of calculating
statistical features based on an unevenly spaced temporal sequence of earthquake magnitudes, with a time-window,
where relevant, of the last N events, and hence we will review here only the type of SSFs that are relevant to this
approach. (Noting that we will in this work however calculate these SSF features based only on the last N events within
a given radius R of each successive event in the catalogue, and will make predictions also for only an equally restricted
region surrounding that event; this will be explained in more detail in Section 4, and is a significant difference from the
way that these traditional SSFs have been used in previous works.)
The first and still most influential set of SSFs were those six proposed by Ma et al. in 1999 [22], with two further
features added by Panakkat and Adeli in 2007 [23]. We will refer to this set of eight indicators, which includes the
Gutenberg-Richter b-values discussed in the Introduction, as the MPA set, and these are listed in Table 1.
Table 1: Ma / Panakkat & Adeli (MPA) seismic statistical features. The first six were proposed by Ma et al. in [22]; the
remaining two were added by Panakkat and Adeli in [23].
Name
Description
b
b-value in Gutenberg-Richter (GR) law, calculated over last N events
η
deviation from GR law during last N events
Mdef
magnitude deficit (difference between max observed earthquake magnitude during last N events, and
max expected from GR law)
T
time during which last N seismic events occurred
Mmean
mean magnitude of last N seismic events
dE1/2
seismic energy release
µ
mean time between last N characteristic events
c
coefficient of variation of the mean time between last N characteristic events
A different set of seven features was proposed by Reyes et al in 2013 [24] [25]; five of the seven are measures of change
in the b-value during the last N events, combined with x6, the maximum earthquake magnitude during the last seven
days, and x7, the probability, according to the Gutenberg-Richter (GR) law, of an earthquake with magnitude greater
than or equal to a specified magnitude during the time within which the last N events occurred.
Many other SSFs of this same category (based on the last N events, only magnitude and temporal properties of the
catalogue sequence considered) have been considered and widely used. These include the GR a-value (intercept
parameter, measuring the level of seismic activity in the region studied), probabilistic recurrence times (TrecM) [26]
(the time between two earthquakes of magnitude greater than or equal to a specified magnitude M). It has been
additionally proposed to measure the rate of seismic energy release (dE1/2) [27], and measures of changes in the rate
of seismicity (Habermann’s z-value [28] and the β-measure of Matthews and Reasenberg [29]).
These commonly used SSFs, of which the most complete set assembled was the list of features originally proposed by
Asim et al. in 2018 [30] [31], can, following [30], be usefully divided into features that do (referred to as parametric,
Table 2, and potentially sensitive to issues of catalogue completeness, as will be discussed in Section Methodology) and
do not (referred to as non-parametric, Table 3) depend on the Gutenberg-Richter a- and b-values. (We note a small
difference between our usage and that of [30] in that we include a and b themselves in the parametric feature set.)
It is this widely-used set of SSFs, comprising the sum of those features in Tables 1 and 2, a set that we previously used
in [16] to demonstrate that SSFs have a predictive value substantially beyond that of generic time series features, that
we will incorporate in our proposed spatiotemporal model, alongside a novel feature derived from the operation of a
3

--- Sayfa 4 ---
Using Seismic Statistical Features and VQ-VAE to Improve Spatiotemporal Seismicity Predictability
Table 2: Parametric seismic statistical features (27 in total), as used and defined in [31].
Feature(s)
Description and / or source
b, η, Mdef
Ma et al. [22]
x7
Reyes et al. [24], in this case measuring probability of occurrence
of an earthquake with M ≥6
a
y-intercept from GR law [32] (level of seismic activity)
σb
standard deviation of b value, as used in [33]
Trec
probabilistic recurrence time [26], for M in {4.0, 4.1, 4.2, ... , 6.0}
Table 3: Non-parametric seismic statistical features (six in total), as used and defined in [31].
Feature(s)
Description and / or source
T, Mmean, dE1/2
Ma et al. [22]
x6
Reyes et al. [24]
z
seismic rate change (method of Habermann) [19]
β
seismic rate change (method of Matthews & Reasenberg) [29]
deep learning model (VQ-VAE autoencoder) whose construction is explained in Section 4. Our previous work had a
total of 60 SSF features because, following [30], we calculated all parametric features using both the method of least
squares and the method of maximum likelihood to obtain a and b. Our work to be presented here uses fewer features
(only 33) because the 27 parametric features are now calculated in only one way, using the method of van der Elst [34]
[35] to obtain the b-value and maximum likelihood to obtain the a-value, in line with current seismological practice.
We note that there are many other possible SSFs of the category considered here. For example, Novick and Last [36]
assembled a set of 94 features (though some undefined), and Hu et al. [21] used a very large set of 282 seismic features,
largely distinct, aside from a, b, T, and dE1/2, from the ‘classical’ sets of SSFs. These alternatives are of interest but
they do not have the long history of use of the more common indicators. Since our purpose here is to explore the way
that a restricted feature computation distance (to allow the value of the GR b-value to be exploited) and a restricted
prediction distance (to match the spatial scope of the feature computation and also to potentially be of more practical
utility) affect SSF-based prediction, and considering that we will also add a wholly novel feature unrelated to SSFs, we
prefer to use a feature set for which there is significant prior art.
2.2
VQ-VAE
Introduced by van den Oord et al. [37], the Vector Quantised Variational Autoencoder (VQ-VAE) is a powerful deep
learning architecture designed to compress complex, high-dimensional data into a simplified, compact format. While
standard autoencoders map data into a smooth, continuous space, a VQ-VAE forces the data into a discrete ‘codebook’,
which is a fixed collection of distinct learned patterns. In a standard machine learning context, these distinct codes are
typically extracted as compressed features to be used for purposes such as data classification or clustering, or used for
time series sequence generation. In contrast, we do not use these codes for feature extraction or for prediction. The
value of the discrete codebook structure for our work is that it acts as a natural way to categorise different regional
seismic patterns. By forcing the model to downsample our catalogue-converted map data into a small set of fixed codes,
it can learn to recognise and group recurring macro-scale seismic behaviours, but as noted above we do not make direct
use of these codes. Instead, we evaluate how well the model can reconstruct our regional seismicity maps to see where
the seismic activity deviates from normal patterns, which helps us track local stress build-up. The specific way this is
done is explained in detail in Section 4.3.1.
3
Related work
We will begin in Section 3.1 by discussing papers that have used VQ-VAE models for seismological applications; as
will be seen, to our knowledge there is only one past work that has addressed issues of seismicity prediction, and that
is within the context of laboratory experiments. Section 3.2 will then review uses of the other key component of our
proposed prediction model, seismic statistical features (SSFs) derived from earthquake catalogue data, for making
regional (Section 3.2.1) or more geographically focused (Section 3.2.2) assessments of seismicity. Finally, within the
SSF section of the review, we will in Section 3.2.3 consider more advanced versions of the latter, in which deep learning
(DL) models are used to integrate information gathered over a wider geographical area in order to improve prediction
4

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Using Seismic Statistical Features and VQ-VAE to Improve Spatiotemporal Seismicity Predictability
for a more focused one, as these models have elements in common with our proposed use of a novel feature derived
from a VQ-VAE model.
3.1
Uses of VQ-VAE in geoscience
Given that VQ-VAE has proven extremely useful in data compression within many application areas, and given that
many applications within Earth science are highly data-intensive, it is not surprising to see that the popularity of this
type of encoder model within geoscience applications has been increasing. However, VQ-VAE has so far been almost
exclusively applied in the fields of subsurface imaging and geomodelling. In the case of seismic imaging applications,
for example, Shi et al. [38] and Yuan et al. [39] used VQ-VAE as a component in a model for automatic horizon picking.
Turning to subsurface modelling, Harsuko et al. [40] recently showed how VQ-VAE can be used to create more accurate
velocity models, while the paper of Misra et al. [41], which benchmarks a number of data compression models for
the task of reparametrising a geomodel of approximately 60,000 grid cells, provides an especially strong argument in
favour of VQ-VAE in complex geological modelling scenarios, achieving both high compression ratios (of up to 1250:1
for the VQ-VAE2 model) and high-quality data reconstruction. To our knowledge, however, the only application of
VQ-VAE to the study of earthquake precursory activity is Wang et al. [42], which uses VQ-VAE as part of a model
to effectively predict future fault friction in a laboratory context, though it should be noted that in this work it is the
codebook content that is used as a source of information about precursory activity—as emphasised in Section 2.2, this
is very different to the use we make of VQ-VAE in our current work, in which it is, in contrast, the reconstruction error
that is used as the basis for a new predictive feature.
3.2
SSF-based prediction of seismicity
This section will not consider prediction based on single features such as the Gutenberg-Richter b-value [2] or the
Habermann seismic rate change z [19] since, as discussed in the Introduction, this type of assessment has been
controversial outside of notable success areas such as the FTLS system of Gulia and Wiemer [10] [11], aimed to
determine whether a given event is a mainshock or precursor of a larger event to come. Additionally, as also discussed
in the Introduction, it would seem unlikely that earthquake prediction in a broad context (as opposed to a specific task
such as that addressed by the FTLS), should that ever be achievable, could be done on the basis of one or two features,
and that from a machine learning point of view it is anyhow advisable to offer a range of features to a model, without
pre-judgement. Thus we will here consider machine learning models that use a range of SSFs, with up to 282 such
features [21]. The typical framing of the problem is to ask if, based on features computed from recent seismic history,
there will be an event of a certain magnitude in a certain region during a certain future period of time. (For example, to
ask if, based on the last N = 50 catalogued events, there will be a magnitude M ≥5.0 event anywhere in Southern
California at some time within the next 15 days, with target 1 if this is so, 0 otherwise.) However, some formulations of
the SSF-based earthquake prediction problem, such as those in [13] and [36], can interestingly differ in the way the
problem is framed yet still be considered to belong to the same family.
As discussed both in [15] and in our previous work [16], there has been a substantial past problem with data leakage
in SSF-based prediction work. This has been due to a belief that once the feature vectors have been computed via a
moving window of N events that the (feature, target) pairs can then be shuffled before dividing the full dataset into
train, validation, and test sets; this unfortunately leads to data leakage as many of the examples used in training will
have information in common with examples assigned to the test set. None of the papers to be discussed below fall
into this category (though one has the less serious data leakage issue of not leaving a gap between train and test sets).
However, it should not be assumed that omission from the set of papers discussed here necessarily implies data leakage.
It should be noted that this will be a short and selective review with a focus on papers that provide feature rankings, and
especially on the ranking of the b-value; a more substantial review of SSF-based ML earthquake prediction models can
be found in [15], with additional more recent works discussed by us in [16].
3.2.1
Regional seismicity prediction using SSFs
This subsection will consider works for which the objective is to predict whether or not there will be an event of a
certain magnitude during a certain period of time in a region defined by national boundaries, or one as large as such.
This is the classic framework for SSF-based prediction. While it might be criticised as of uncertain practical utility if
the region was very large, even if the predictions for it were very reliable, region-wide prediction at a national scale
has been a useful arena in which to test the predictive value of a variety of seismic statistical features. One caveat,
however (which is applicable also to some works discussed in Section 3.2.2): features with demonstrated local value, in
particular the b-value, may not show this same value in studies conducted over larger regions, as will be seen.
5

--- Sayfa 6 ---
Using Seismic Statistical Features and VQ-VAE to Improve Spatiotemporal Seismicity Predictability
Last et al. [13] makes predictions for Israel and its neighbouring countries from a mix of classic and novel SSFs,
expanded to a total of 94 seismicity indicators in Novick and Last [36], which makes predictions for California, Japan,
and Israel. These papers eliminate all possibility of data leakage, though framing the prediction problem somewhat
differently, asking, for a given region, whether an event of magnitude greater than the median of maximum yearly
magnitudes will occur in the following year. The earlier paper [13] achieves its best test result (an AUC of 0.698) using
a multi-objective info-fuzzy network, a type of decision tree algorithm. It ranks the 26 SSF features used in terms of
information gain ratio and finds the b-value to be low-ranked, lowest within the set of six classical SSFs considered and
14th overall. However, the region considered is large and the low ranking is in line with expectations for this scenario.
The later paper [36] compares test results for a wide variety of models for its three regions, with the best results (AUCs
in excess of 0.80) being for the Japanese earthquake catalogue dataset, using logistic regression with a previous use of
decision trees to select features, with XGBoost providing the best result. The Japanese dataset was by far the largest
and most complete, and this is near-certainly why the results for this region were the best. It is for the same reason of
dataset size and completeness that we have chosen to focus on catalogue data from Japan in this paper.
A previous work co-authored by one of us [15] used the 60 SSFs proposed in [30] and used in [31], with strict controls
to prevent data leakage. As in the case of [13] and [36] a variety of ML models were trialled, the most effective in this
case being CatBoost. Despite the exclusion of any possible data leakage, results for the prediction of M ≥5.0 events
within the next 15 days, using an N = 50 feature computation window, were excellent for Chile and Southern California
(test AUCs of 0.8287 and 0.8822, respectively). However, the model did not perform as well for the Hindukush region,
where a test AUC of 0.5103 was obtained. As in the work of [36] it appears catalogue completeness and dataset size
here have a large influence on the quality of the results: the region with the best-predicted events, Southern California,
had an Mc (the magnitude above which it can be considered all events were observed) of 2.6 and a total of 33,544
examples after events with M < Mc have been removed, while the Hindukush region had an Mc of 4.0 and a resulting
total of only 4,351 events available for training, validation, and testing. These results provide further evidence of the
importance of using a large dataset with a low Mc. Regarding the b-value, the SHAP ranking here was very low for
Chile and Southern California, and it was not selected at all in the case of the Hindukush model. The dominant category
of selected feature, for all three regions, was the probabilistic recurrence times of Wiemer and Wyss [26]. These features
have not been heavily used in SSF-based prediction, but appear to have considerable potential value.
The same strict control over data leakage was exercised in our previous work [16], where we also used the same set
of SSFs as in [15], those originating in [30]. However, in contrast to [15], this work focused not on trying to obtain
the best possible result (and so did not explore many alternate ML models, choosing instead to use XGBoost) but on
demonstrating the value of SSFs in relation to generic time series features from the tsfresh package [43], a category of
experiment that had not been previously carried out. For both of our study regions of Japan and Chile test AUCs of over
0.80 were obtained using the SSF feature set, while prediction from the tsfresh feature set was not substantially better
than random. These results provide a strong foundation for our use of this SSF feature set as a key component in the
proposed model of this paper, though using a different means of computation for a subset of the features, explained in
Section 4, which reduces the total number of SSFs from 60 to 33 now. In relation to feature rankings, the most striking
observation was how different these were in the two studied areas. For Japan, recurrence times dominate the top 20 of
the 39/60 features used by the model, with no appearance of b, a result in line with the previously-discussed results [15]
(including the heavy use of recurrence times). However, for Chile, b is here second-ranked out of the 18/60 features
used by the model. Some reasons for these differences between the two regions are suggested in [16]; however, the high
ranking of b at a regional scale in the case of Chile remains a current topic of investigation.
3.2.2
Prediction in geographically restricted areas using SSFs
Here the study area is less than an entire country or region, the traditional framework for SSF-based prediction, but is
usually not small, and can be motivated, for example, by a wish to divide the region into seismogenic zones having
distinct geological characteristics. However, having applied this restriction the work then progresses in exactly the same
way as whole-region prediction, gathering data from the entire sub-region and defining the problem as being that of
predicting whether an earthquake of a certain magnitude will occur anywhere at all in that sub-region. Thus, while
there may be a training benefit in avoiding mixing examples from areas in which seismicity has fundamentally different
origins, this approach would not usually, even if the predictions were sufficiently accurate, lead to any future possibility
of an actionable alerting system due to the large size of the regions. Additionally, it will be noted that areas of the
typical sizes used in these works are likely to be still too large for b to be useful as a measure of stress build-up.
The 2013 investigation by Martínez-Álvarez et al. [12] into the best set of SSFs (from out of the sets introduced by Ma
et al. [22], Panakkat and Adeli [23], and Reyes et al. [24]) for earthquake prediction in Chile and the Iberian Peninsula
is of particular interest because of its conclusions regarding the b-value in smaller-than-national regions. The paper
displayed superior data handling, though with the flaw of omitting an event gap of at least the length of the N = 50
feature computation window between the train and test sets (no validation sets were used); we do not consider this likely
6

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Using Seismic Statistical Features and VQ-VAE to Improve Spatiotemporal Seismicity Predictability
to have impinged on its broad conclusions. It considered four Chilean regions, with cells varying from 0.5◦× 0.5◦to
1◦× 1◦around the cities of Talca, Santiago, Pichilemu and Valparaíso, and the two most seismic zones of the Iberian
peninsula (the Alborán Sea and West Azores-Gibraltar Fault, with cells around 1◦× 1◦). However, it should be noted
that these are larger areas than those we will consider here, ranging from around 3,025 to around 12,100 square km as
opposed to our circular feature calculation and prediction areas of around 1,810 square km. We believe it is likely that
the substantial size of most of the areas used in [12] is the reason why the b-value was very low-ranked (joint 10th, the
lowest possible ranking), for all Chilean and Iberian regions.
3.2.3
Spatiotemporal prediction with SSFs and spatial data fusion
In this subsection we discuss models that make a localised prediction of seismic activity but use information gathered
across a range of spatial scales, sometimes multimodally, in order to inform this prediction. All of these models
necessarily use deep learning (DL) in some way. However, only one model uses SSF features in addition to those
extracted using DL from spatial maps, that of Hu et al. [21], and is thus comparable to the work we present here, with
its combination of SSF features and the VQ-VAE-derived b-value analogue. We will discuss this model later but first set
the scene by briefly reviewing that set of works that do not use auxiliary seismic feature inputs.
Considering those works that use only gridded maps of earthquake occurrence as input, the model of Wang et al. [44]
has been notably influential. In this paper, which focused on earthquake prediction for mainland China, the study area
was divided into nine large cells, with the intention being to predict, using an LSTM model with two-dimensional input
feeding into a subsequent dense network with softmax applied to the outputs, whether a given cell would experience an
earthquake of magnitude M > 4.5 during the next month based on the 3 × 3 binary patterns associated with previous
months. The proposed two-dimensional model was demonstrated to be superior to a one-dimensional one, and in
addition it was shown that if prediction is restricted to sets of cells covering the same fault zone, the performance for
those sets of cells is superior to whole-area prediction. Performance was measured in terms of true positive accuracy
(TPA) and true negative accuracy (TNA), with (TPA, TNA) for whole-area prediction of (68.56%, 81.31%), boosted
to (77.07%, 93.49%) for subset regions focused on specific fault zones. However, these figures dropped considerably
when prediction was for the next two weeks rather than the next month, with whole area prediction (TPA, TNA) now
(60.83%, 77.38%) and values for fault zone focused prediction now (69.28%, 94.09%).
Following the same approach as Wang et al. [44], Do˘gan and Demir [45] compared the use of an LSTM and structural
RNN (SRNN) for China and Turkey, with the same 3 × 3 grid of approximately 15◦× 7◦cells used for China as in
[44], a 3 × 3 grid of smaller (but still large, around 7◦× 3◦) cells for Turkey, and input and target encoding as in [44].
They found that the SRNN model performed better than the LSTM proposed in [44], with a test F1 score of 0.77 vs.
0.75 for China, and 0.69 vs. 0.62 for Turkey. However, a division of the China data area into a 5 × 5 grid, as opposed to
a 3 × 3 one, substantially reduced the effectiveness of the model, for the SRNN variant reducing the F1 score from
0.77 to 0.54. Sonthalia et al. [46] reimplemented the model of Wang et al. [44] for three different regional datasets:
Java (2 × 2 grid, target ‘will there be any M ≥4.0 events in a given cell in the next month?’), Sumatra (3 × 3 grid,
M ≥4.0) and Sulawesi (3 × 3 grid, M ≥4.5). It was observed that the use of softmax in [44] enforces a choice as
to which cell will experience event(s) of the specified magnitude, while it is possible, especially for large cells in a
strongly seismic area, that more than one cell in any given month will experience such events; for this reason softmax
was in this work replaced by a sigmoid activation function. High test F1 scores were obtained, in excess of 0.82, but it is
noted in the paper that the correct predictions are mostly of smaller events, with for Sumatra a test F1 score of 0.90 for
4.0 ≤M < 5.0 but only 0.29 for 5.0 ≤M ≤7.9. Overall, it appears that models with only a gridded representation of
seismic activity as input may be limited in their predictive ability, especially when the prediction time horizon is shorter,
the grid cells are smaller, or when the events considered are larger.
The only model in the literature of which we are aware that is comparable to ours in its intention to use both map data
and catalogue-derived SSF features is that of Hu et al. [21]. The spatial data here goes beyond a map of earthquake
occurrences to include also two geological maps, one of the lithology in its study area and one of the fault systems. It
divides its study region of China into 120 cells of size 4◦× 4◦, larger than the circular regions we use (with a radius
of approximately 0.22◦) but smaller than those used by Wang et al. It uses 282 SSFs, the largest number used in any
single work to our knowledge, though this number derives in large part from a use of multiple temporal scales (for
example, the b-value contributes 14 features, computed separately for the preceding year, each month of the preceding
year, and the last 100 events). This range of temporal scales is likely related to its intention (similarly to [13] and [36])
to make a prediction for the following year. Predictions are made for the occurrences of earthquakes of magnitudes
0 ≤M < 5, 5 ≤M < 6, and M ≥7. The test macro F1 score of 0.4421 is statistically significantly better than a
wide range of competitor models also implemented by the authors (the second-best, a transformer model, achieving
only a value of 0.3438), though as expected prediction is best for the more numerous smaller events, with test F1
score of 0.8748 for 0 ≤M < 5 declining to a value of 0.2222 for M ≥7. Transfer learning to the contiguous and
western USA shows that the model is applicable outside its original training context, and performance for a 1◦× 1◦cell
7

--- Sayfa 8 ---
Using Seismic Statistical Features and VQ-VAE to Improve Spatiotemporal Seismicity Predictability
size for this region, while not reported in the same detail as for the 4◦× 4◦cell size, at least for the smallest events
0 ≤M < 5 remains excellent, with a test accuracy of 97.35%. Most importantly from the point of view of our own
work in this paper, ablation experiments in [21] showed that removing either the map data (of the described three types)
or the SSF data substantially harmed the model, demonstrating that these were working synergistically to achieve the
model’s superior results. We consider the results of [21] to be aligned with and supportive of our discovery in this paper,
presented in Section 5, that a map-derived analogue of the Gutenberg-Richter b-value can usefully add to information
from one-dimensional catalogue data, including providing insights not present in the classical b-value itself.
4
Methodology
4.1
Localised computation of seismic statistical features
We here use a form of spatiotemporal seismicity prediction that differs from works such as that of Wang et al. [44] and
Hu et al. [21], discussed in the preceding Section 3.2.3, in that the localised regions within which predictions are made
are not fixed grid cells, but circular regions of radius R centred on the epicentre of a past seismic event, that open at the
time the event occurs and stay open until either at least one following event greater than or equal to a certain magnitude
has occurred within that region, or until a certain period of time has elapsed. In line with our previous work [16] and
much other work using SSFs we attempt to predict events M ≥5, as this range references nontrivial seismic events
without being restricted to ones so rare that effective prediction, on grounds of a lack of data, becomes unfeasible.
Again in line with our previous work [16] and wide usage within the SSF-based prediction literature, we select the
temporal horizon for prediction to be 15 days. We choose the size of the prediction region to be radius R = 24 km, with
SSFs in this case computed only using the last N = 50 events that have occurred within that region (thus ensuring the
spatial scale of feature computation matches the spatial scale of the prediction target). It should be noted that instances
in which 50 preceding events cannot be gathered cause that example to be excluded from all of the train, validation, and
test sets, as such events do not allow for reliable computation of the SSF features.
However, and importantly, we go beyond these locally-computed SSFs as features for localised prediction, merging them
with a novel feature generated via the use of a VQ-VAE model. Our framework for this combination of traditional SSFs
with deep learning-based spatial anomaly features via a dual-feature pipeline is shown in Fig. 1. While the first branch
extracts localised SSFs computed as outlined above, the parallel deep learning branch processes magnitude-stratified
seismicity maps through a VQ-VAE model to derive latent anomaly features represented by reconstruction errors. These
complementary feature sets are concatenated and filtered through BorutaShap [47] feature selection to isolate the most
robust predictive variables. Finally, the optimised feature subset is fed into a hyperparameter-tuned XGBoost classifier
trained under a 5-fold time series cross validation strategy to assess future seismicity from seismic events (M ≥5.0)
15 days in the future. As with the choice of prediction magnitude range and time horizon, the basic machine learning
elements of the model are in common with our previous work [16], which also justifies these design choices; the
intention here was to focus on the value of changing from a whole-region to a spatiotemporal framework that includes a
novel spatially-driven feature, and thus it was not advantageous to also change, for example, our prediction model to
something other than XGBoost [48], or to measure feature importances differently.
The one element of the SSF branch of the pipeline we do differently in this work relates to the computation of those
features deemed ‘parametric’ (those that use the Gutenberg-Richter a- and/or b-values, as listed in Table 2). In [16]
we followed [30] and all previous work that has used these features in computing each such feature using both the
method of maximum likelihood and the method of least squares to derive the a and/or b-values, giving 54 parametric
features and a total of 60 features overall. However, though from a machine learning point of view it was interesting to
explore this choice of computation methods, allowing the model to decide via BorutaShap feature selection what to
make use of, the seismological community has critiqued these methods as overly sensitive to an accurate assessment
of the magnitude of completeness Mc (the magnitude above which all seismic events within a given region can be
assumed to have been detected and recorded within its catalogue). Following now-standard seismological practice, we
compute the b-value using the method proposed by van der Elst [35] in 2021, which requires only a loose assessment of
Mc, and compute the a-value by the method of maximum likelihood [49] because new methods of computing a-value
produced unstable results. This has the effect of reducing the number of parametric features from 54 to 27 and our total
number of available SSF features from 60 to 33.
4.2
Dataset
We adopt an event-based spatiotemporal framework where each sample in the raw dataset corresponds to a single
earthquake event drawn from the Japan catalogue downloaded from Japan Meteorological Agency. The full raw
catalogue is summarised in Table 4, later filtered, for the purpose of computation of the SSF features, using a magnitude
of completeness of Mc = 0.7, with events of smaller magnitudes being discarded.
8

--- Sayfa 9 ---
Using Seismic Statistical Features and VQ-VAE to Improve Spatiotemporal Seismicity Predictability
Figure 1: Complete modelling pipeline.
Table 4: Japan dataset summary
Coordinates
Catalogue period
Number of events
22.0°– 48.0° N, 122.0°– 154.0° E
01/04/2012 – 31/03/2022
2,433,624
The dataset is split temporally into training, validation, and test. The exact splits and numbers of samples in each subset
are shown in Table 5. The one-month gaps between adjacent data subsets serve two purposes. They minimise the
possibility of any aftershock sequence active at the boundary contributing both training and validation labels—a leakage
path that is easy to overlook when working with clustered seismicity—and they ensure that the 15-day prediction
horizon of the last training-period event does not overlap with the first validation-period event. The same logic applies
to the validation and test periods. Without such a buffer, the temporal independence of the splits would be compromised.
For a given event in the catalogue, we generate a binary label indicating whether at least one earthquake of magnitude
M ≥5.0 occurs within a defined spatiotemporal neighbourhood of that event over the subsequent fifteen days. A
9

--- Sayfa 10 ---
Using Seismic Statistical Features and VQ-VAE to Improve Spatiotemporal Seismicity Predictability
Table 5: Dataset split
Region
Catalogue period
Training period
Validation period
Test period
Japan
01/04/2012–31/03/2022
≤31/03/2018
01/05/2018–31/03/2020
01/05/2020–31/03/2022
Number of events
1,409,930
740,141
225,019
295,352
minimum of 50 past neighbours is required for the event to be retained as a valid example in the dataset, so that the
statistical features are computed over a sample large enough to be stable.
4.3
From one-dimensional temporal features to a two-dimensional latent map
The SSFs are computed from one-dimensional catalogue data within the spatiotemporal framework, but they are, by
nature, themselves only temporal features and do not intrinsically encode the geometric and spatial distribution of
earthquakes in Japan, nor do they capture how that distribution evolves between successive events. Therefore, to
complement the SSFs, we want to include natively spatial features that add maximally-independent predictive value to
the existing SSF set. In preliminary experiments, we noticed that the b-value’s feature ranking position, consistently
lower than widespread seismological opinion would expect (though higher than for whole-region prediction for Japan),
improved as the spatial neighbourhood was tightened from 24km to 12km and 3km. However, the smaller spatial
neighbourhoods could not be used as the amount of data in these cases was not sufficient to obtain a high AUC score.
This revealed the b-value as a highly localised feature whose predictive value is underutilised within the standard feature
generation framework, even when prediction is done at an R = 24 km scale (0.22◦, much smaller than the grid cell
sizes used in the work described in Section 3.2.3). Therefore, this paper explores deep learning techniques to find a new
way to approximate b-value as a b-value analogue to see if its predictive power can be exploited without computing
it analytically as in the SSFs set. We design a new data preprocessing step in the deep learning feature branch to
transform the one-dimensional raw time series input into a two-dimensional seismicity map input. In the training
process, the aim is for VQ-VAE to learn an unsupervised magnitude-frequency-distribution dynamically, representing
the aforementioned b-value analogue, so that it can be used alongside SSFs as an additional macro-regime signal.
4.3.1
A new type of VQ-VAE input preprocessing: magnitude-stratified channel encodings
In this preprocessing step, we encode the underlying magnitude-frequency information in the input itself by binning
earthquakes into three magnitude channels—micro (M < 2.0), small (2.0 ≤M < 3.5), and moderate (M ≥3.5)—and
using the log-transformed event count per bin as the pixel intensity. The relative intensities across the three channels
at any given pixel then encode the local magnitude-frequency state directly: a pixel bright in the micro channel but
dim in the others indicates a creeping, high-b regime, while a pixel dense across all three channels indicates a lower-b,
locked regime. The encoding mechanism is illustrated by the example in Fig. 2. The convolutional encoder is free to
learn whichever combination of these intensities is most reconstructable, and the reconstruction error—we explicitly
weight by raw event counts during training—becomes a measure of how well the current spatial b-value analogue field
conforms to patterns the model has previously seen in the training set. The bin boundaries are not optimised but set to
physically meaningful magnitude boundaries based on our prediction threshold of M ≥5.0.
4.3.2
Spatiotemporal map construction
The study region is bounded by latitudes 22.0° – 48.0° N and longitudes 122.0° – 154.0° E, enclosing the Japanese
archipelago and the main subduction zones. The region is discretised into a 160 × 160 grid, producing a spatial
resolution of approximately 18 km per cell. This size ensures individual cells fit inside our 24km prediction radius, to
provide enough initial input resolution for the encoder’s three downsampling stages, explained in Section 4.4. Time
is discretised by a sliding window of length 15 days advanced in 6-hour steps, with each window producing one
three-channel seismicity map in which each channel is log transformed using ln(1 + count), where the count is the
number of earthquake events that occurred within the corresponding spatial cell during that window. The 6-hour overlap
between consecutive maps is chosen to allow the model to observe gradual changes in the magnitude distribution rather
than only transitions. The window length of 15 days is chosen because the b-value signal depends on the accumulation
of micro-seismicity, which requires several days of accumulation before a stable magnitude-frequency shape emerges
per pixel. Here we choose to set it at 15 days because it matches our prediction horizon and showed the best validation
performance compared to 3- and 30-day alternatives. The resulting tensor has shape T × 3 × 160 × 160, where T is the
number of windows spanning the full study period.
To account for the fact that the absolute rate of seismicity in Japan undergoes a multi-year shift over the 2012-2022
period, such that a model trained on static early statistics will perceive later windows as anomalous purely by virtue of
10

--- Sayfa 11 ---
Using Seismic Statistical Features and VQ-VAE to Improve Spatiotemporal Seismicity Predictability
Figure 2: Sample seismicity map
this drift, we address this by computing a 365-day trailing rolling z-score per channel, so that the seismicity input map
in each window is normalised relative to the preceding year of activity rather than to the full training-period mean. The
resulting normalised tensor encodes relative rather than absolute counts and is the input passed to the VQ-VAE.
4.4
The VQ-VAE model
The VQ-VAE model consists of a convolutional encoder, a discrete codebook, and a convolutional decoder, with
architecture shown in Fig. 3. Three downsampling stages reduce the 160 × 160 spatial input to a 20 × 20 grid of
64-dimensional latent vectors, each of which is replaced by the nearest of 128 entries in a learned codebook before the
decoder reconstructs the three-channel seismicity map. The three-stage downsampling is chosen so that each latent cell
corresponds to a physical region of roughly 144 × 144 km, a scale comparable to the historical rupture lengths of major
fault segments along the Nankai Trough [50] and the Japan Trench; this aligns the receptive field of the latent code
with the spatial extent of the geological processes the model is intended to characterise. The codebook size, 128, is
11

--- Sayfa 12 ---
Using Seismic Statistical Features and VQ-VAE to Improve Spatiotemporal Seismicity Predictability
deliberately modest, reflecting our expectation that the number of distinguishable macro-seismic regimes in the region
is not massive as usually seen in the standard computer vision domain.
Figure 3: VQ-VAE pipeline.
4.4.1
Quantisation
For the quantisation component of the VQ-VAE model, we used exponential moving-average updates to the codebook
entries, with a commitment loss weight of 0.25 constraining the encoder outputs to their assigned codebook vectors.
A dead-code reset mechanism replaces individual codebook embedding vectors that go unused for thirty consecutive
epochs with random copies of recent active encoder outputs with added noise, preventing codebook collapse without
disturbing the active portion of the codebook.
4.4.2
Loss function and regularisation
The reconstruction loss in VQ-VAE is a weighted mean-squared error in the normalised space, with per-pixel weights of
1 + log(1 + xraw),
(2)
where xraw is the un-normalised event count serving as the weight multiplier to the normalised error. This forces
the model to concentrate loss on pixels that contain seismic activity and prevents an abundance of empty cells from
dominating the gradient. Two regularising augmentations are also applied during training to prevent overfitting: small
random spatial shifts of up to two pixels, simulating translation along the fault plane since fault ruptures are not usually
at the exact same spots, and additive Gaussian noise injected into 15% of active pixels, which discourages exact
memorisation of recurring patterns. Adam optimisation is applied with an initial learning rate of 10−4 and an adaptive
learning-rate scheduler; early stopping is applied with a patience of 20 epochs on the validation reconstruction loss.
4.5
VQ-VAE feature extraction
The VQ-VAE model is trained exclusively on maps whose timestamps fall within the training period, and the model
weights are then frozen for all subsequent steps. When features are extracted for earthquake events in the validation
and test set, the trained VQ-VAE model with weights frozen from the training period is applied to seismicity maps
from those later periods without any further parameter update. This convention is essential to prevent data leakage. The
rolling z-score normalisation is consistent with this rule because it depends only on the trailing year of data, strictly in
the past and only in the training period and therefore introduces no future dependence.
For each earthquake event retained in the dataset, its timestamp is matched to the corresponding 15-day seismicity map
immediately preceding it. The pre-trained, frozen VQ-VAE model executes a forward pass on this specific multi-channel
seismicity map to generate a normalised reconstruction map, and a spatial reconstruction error map is then derived by
calculating the squared difference between the normalised input and the reconstruction, scaled by the log-transformed
raw event-count weights. To capture localised preparatory signals, the geographic coordinates of an event are mapped
to its exact grid cell on the error map. We extract both the mean and maximum reconstruction errors across three
channels for each cell. These two values are log-transformed using the same log(1 + x) formulation to stabilise feature
variance. We then construct a dynamic delta feature (∆recon_error) by subtracting the historical 30-day trailing average
of the mean reconstruction error within that specific spatial cell from its current value. While the local spatial patch
isolates structural anomalies in the immediate vicinity of the impending epicentre, the 30-day delta in theory should
show the sudden spike from the longer-term regional baselines.
12

--- Sayfa 13 ---
Using Seismic Statistical Features and VQ-VAE to Improve Spatiotemporal Seismicity Predictability
5
Results
5.1
Spatiotemporal seismicity prediction
The first step in evaluating the model was to consider the effectiveness of the proposed spatiotemporal model for the task
of classifying whether a seismic event of magnitude M ≥5.0 would occur within a localised circular neighbourhood of
radius 24 km during a future temporal horizon of 15 days, both with and without the novel b-value analogue (VQ-VAE-b)
feature. It was found that with a test set of 291,845 examples, the AUC for the model without the new feature was 0.88,
and with it was improved to 0.90, with ROC curves shown in Figure 4.
Considering the test set performance of the SSF-only spatiotemporal model, which was within regions of diameter
48 km (0.44◦, much smaller than the grid sizes in the models discussed in Section 3.2.3), it was in fact slightly higher
than the test set AUC of 0.85 reported for the whole of Japan in our previous work [16]. Taking into account that the
test sets in these two works covered slightly different time periods, that of [16] was smaller (137,936 examples), and
that we here compute the SSFs somewhat differently (as explained in Section 4.1), this rough equality in performance is
still a notable result. While we do not as yet attempt any form of operational earthquake prediction, considering it to be
premature, the ability to issue a warning at an actionable geographic scale rather than country-wide would surely be a
necessary component of such a system.
Turning to the SSF + VQ-VAE-b model, it might appear from Figure 4 that the benefit of the new feature is not large.
However, the next section will show, for the example of the March 2022 Fukushima earthquake, that the VQ-VAE-b
feature appears much better able to localise a build-up of seismic stress than the classical Gutenberg-Richter b-value,
and additionally, in the feature importance analysis of Section 5.3, to be able to largely replace the use of the classical
b-value (including its standard deviation) within the prediction model.
Figure 4: Test period ROC curves comparing the SSF-only and SSF + VQ-VAE-b dual-feature model
5.2
Investigation: the March 2022 Fukushima earthquake
To examine the mechanism of operation of the VQ-VAE-b feature, a diagnostic spatial mapping analysis, shown in
Figure 5 and 6, was performed on the 15-day window immediately preceding the March 2022 M = 7.4 Fukushima
earthquake, a major destructive event, occurring near a plate boundary, within the unseen test set.
13

--- Sayfa 14 ---
Using Seismic Statistical Features and VQ-VAE to Improve Spatiotemporal Seismicity Predictability
Figure 5: Spatial diagnostic analysis of the 15-day window preceding the March 2022 M7.4 Fukushima earthquake,
showing the distributions of the classical SSF b-value (top) and the VQ-VAE-b raw reconstruction error (bottom).
14

--- Sayfa 15 ---
Using Seismic Statistical Features and VQ-VAE to Improve Spatiotemporal Seismicity Predictability
Figure 6: Correlation analysis between classical SSF b-value and VQ-VAE-b raw reconstruction error
The spatial distribution of the classical analytical b-value across the Japanese grid network during this time window is
visibly noisy, providing only a weak localised signal, as can be seen in Figure 5 (top). Conversely, VQ-VAE-b develops
a highly focused, intense spatial anomaly that peaks in close proximity to the geographical coordinates of the impending
mainshock epicentre, as demonstrated by the spatiotemporal map in the same Figure 5 (bottom).
To evaluate the relationship between the two variants of the b-value feature, an event-by-event Pearson correlation
analysis was conducted over the entire test period, as well as within the 15-days preceding the M = 7.4 Fukushima
event. The statistical analysis pairs the classical b-value (SSFs) against the event-matched VQ-VAE-b reconstruction
error for each individual earthquake event. Across the full test set, the global Pearson correlation coefficient is
R = −0.0339 with a statistical significance of p = 4.16 × 10−75. This negative correlation remains consistent and
becomes more pronounced during the 15 days preceding the Fukushima event, for which, over a total of N = 5,942
events, there is a correlation of R = −0.0727 (p = 1.98 × 10−8). This relationship is visually captured in the scatter
plot in Figure 6, which maps every seismic event during this precursory window. The data forms a distinct upward
column, showing that the largest spikes in VQ-VAE reconstruction error are tightly concentrated where the classical
b-value drops into a low, high-stress range between 0.5 and 1.0. Outside of this critical zone, where the b-value is larger
than 1.0, the VQ-VAE reconstruction error values remain uniformly low and flat, confirming that the VQ-VAE-b feature
specifically reacts to highly localised intense tectonic stress build-up.
This persistent negative relationship between the classical and analogue (VQ-VAE reconstruction error) b-values would
appear to align well with the underlying physics of fault deformation. Seismologically, a localised drop in the classical
b-value indicates a highly stressed, locked tectonic phase characterised by a decreasing ratio of small-to-large events.
When the VQ-VAE model encounters these anomalous magnitude-frequency distributions, the localised reconstruction
error spikes accordingly. While the exceptionally low p-values referenced earlier demonstrate that this negative
correlation between the classical b-value and reconstruction error is statistically real and robust, the low magnitude of
the R coefficients reveals that the relationship is weakly linear. Some relationship would be expected given that they are
fundamentally addressing the same anomaly in the magnitude-frequency distribution. However, the very different ways
in which they do this, with the VQ-VAE model processing seismicity through non-linear spatial filters across multiple
magnitude channels, mean that the relationship can be only a weak one. Finally, we note that the weakness of the
relationship in fact adds value to the combined feature set, as the VQ-VAE component can provide largely independent
predictive value to the downstream ensemble, as will be seen in the following section examining feature importances.
15

--- Sayfa 16 ---
Using Seismic Statistical Features and VQ-VAE to Improve Spatiotemporal Seismicity Predictability
5.3
Feature importance
To better understand the performance of the XGBoost classifier, SHAP analysis was conducted on the test set. Figure 7
shows the feature rankings sorted by their mean absolute SHAP values, which quantify each variable’s average impact
on the model’s output.
Figure 7: Test set feature importance ranking for the dual-feature (SSFs + VQ-VAE-b) model.
The SHAP value-based feature importance ranking reveals that VQ-VAE-b feature (learned mean reconstruction error
vqvae_recon_mean) emerges as the most valuable predictive variable within the dual-feature model, with the second
most important classical parameter being the Benioff strain energy release (dE1/2).
It is clear from Figure 7 that the analytically calculated Gutenberg-Richter b-value along with its standard deviation
(stdev_b) have negligible direct model impact, with SHAP values near zero. In effect, it appears that the new VQ-VAE-
b has largely overtaken the role of b in the combined feature set. This is in line with the observation in Figure 5 (classical
b, top; VQ-VAE-b, bottom) that the latter is far better at highlighting an area of potentially concerning stress build-up.
This may be because while our 24 km is much smaller than grid sizes typically used in more localised prediction, it
is still too large to make use of the classical b-value in that it may aggregate earthquakes from multiple distinct fault
systems. However, as was noted in Section 4.3, this issue cannot be easily addressed by shrinking the radius of the
prediction area, as this leads to not enough data to build a reliable model. Thus, with data availability as it currently
is (noting also that the Japan dataset is unusually large and complete) it would appear that the new b-value analogue
VQ-VAE-b is a better option for detecting localised stress build-up than the classical, Gutenberg-Richter b-value.
By bypassing direct localised line-fitting computation and instead training the convolutional filters of a VQ-VAE
to minimise a count-weighted reconstruction error over magnitude-stratified spatial arrays, VQ-VAE-b maps these
magnitude-frequency distributions natively across different fault zones. This variable thus serves as a robust spatial
proxy for localised stress macro-states, successfully capturing fault-specific anomalies without incurring the temporal
lag and sparsity penalties that damage the fixed-window analytical way of computing the b-value.
5.4
Evaluation on declustered test set
We have also tested both versions of our spatiotemporal model on a declustered test set. Since a major mainshock
naturally generates an intense localised cluster of aftershock events that are statistically easier to predict than mainshocks,
an evaluation of the model without declustering can achieve artificially inflated AUC metrics by simply predicting
the easier aftershock sequences. After declustering using the Gardner-Knopoff algorithm [51], the original test set is
reduced to 141,109 mainshock examples. The resulting ROC curves are shown in Figure 8, where it will be seen, after
comparison to Figure 4 that though there is an expected drop in performance for this mainshock-only dataset (reflecting
16

--- Sayfa 17 ---
Using Seismic Statistical Features and VQ-VAE to Improve Spatiotemporal Seismicity Predictability
the difficulty of capturing genuine precursory signals compared to aftershock sequences), performance is still very good
for both the SSF-only and VQ-VAE-b-augmented spatiotemporal models.
Figure 8: Declustered test period ROC curves
6
Conclusion
In this work, we investigated the value of both traditional seismic statistical features (SSFs), such as the Gutenberg-
Richter b-value, and a novel feature derived from a deep learning model for localised seismicity prediction. The regions
of feature computation and prediction were restricted to a circle of radius 24 km (0.22◦) around each seismic event in the
catalogue, and we made predictions of future seismicity during the following 15 days within that same circular region.
We kept as many elements as possible in common with our previous study of whole-region prediction using the same
set of traditional SSFs, including the study area of Japan (due to its unusually large and complete earthquake catalogue),
the prediction horizon of 15 days, and the specific question of asking if there would be an event of magnitude M ≥5.0
during that future time. Notably, we discovered that this severe spatial restriction—reducing a question about the
whole of Japan to one about small, temporary, circular prediction zones—could be answered as well as in our previous
whole-region study. (With the caveat that the dataset used here was somewhat larger.) This is a very encouraging result
since, though we consider attempts to use a model such as our current one for the operational earthquake prediction to
be premature, it seems certain that any such forecasts would need to be made with a sufficient degree of geographic
specificity in order to have practical value.
The proposed new VQ-VAE-b feature, the error associated with a VQ-VAE model trained to reconstruct two-dimensional
magnitude-stratified seismic maps, emerged from an observation during early development work with the spatiotemporal
SSF-driven model that the usage of the Gutenberg-Richter b-value increased as the prediction radius was decreased. This
was an observation of great interest to us given the amount of work investigating the use of the b-value for forecasting
future seismicity at local scales, for example in the FTLS system of Gulia and Wiemer. However, our model requires
100,000s of examples for training, validation, and testing, and we found that the test performance also decreased as the
radius of the prediction and data gathering circles decreased because of data sparsity. Even with a catalogue as complete
as that of Japan, we were unable to shrink these zones below a 24 km radius, as we require N ≥50 past events in order
to compute classical SSFs like the b-value. Hence we looked for some other way to measure the localised build-up
17

--- Sayfa 18 ---
Using Seismic Statistical Features and VQ-VAE to Improve Spatiotemporal Seismicity Predictability
of stress, a b-value analogue, that could make better use of the data we had. The new VQ-VAE-b feature does indeed
appear to be able to better localise stress build-up and to boost prediction performance. While at our current scale of
24 km prediction circles the increase in performance was modest (a test AUC of 0.90 as opposed to 0.88), it was even
so very notable that the VQ-VAE-b feature essentially displaced the use of the classical Gutenberg-Richter b-value in
terms of feature usage.
Moving forward, we intend to investigate whether the new VQ-VAE-b feature could enable effective prediction at
smaller than 24 km scales. This will require an adaptation of the current VQ-VAE architecture, adding further layers
to enable it to use smaller cells (less than 18 × 18 km) within the seismicity map while allowing each latent cell to
correspond to the same physical region of 144 × 144 km. We also intend to investigate the best combination of radii for
gathering information for the calculation of SSF features and for making predictions of potential future seismicity, since
our current choice to make these radii the same may not be ideal. If it then emerged, for example, that the prediction
radius of 24 km could be decreased while the data-collection radius stayed the same, this might be another way to boost
performance within smaller seismicity prediction zones.
References
[1] Robert J Geller. Earthquake prediction: a critical review. Geophysical Journal International, 131(3):425–450,
1997.
[2] Beno Gutenberg and Carl F Richter. Earthquake magnitude, intensity, energy, and acceleration: (second paper).
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 46(2):105–145, 1956.
[3] Zuhair H El-Isa and David W Eaton. Spatiotemporal variations in the b-value of earthquake magnitude–frequency
distributions: Classification and causes. Tectonophysics, 615:1–11, 2014.
[4] J Rivière, Z Lv, PA Johnson, and C Marone. Evolution of b-value during the seismic cycle: Insights from
laboratory experiments on simulated faults. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 482:407–413, 2018.
[5] Anna Maria Lombardi. Anomalies and transient variations of b-value in Italy during the major earthquake
sequences: what truth is there to this? Geophysical Journal International, 232(3):1545–1555, 2023.
[6] I Spassiani, M Taroni, M Murru, and G Falcone. Real time Gutenberg–Richter b-value estimation for an ongoing
seismic sequence: an application to the 2022 marche offshore earthquake sequence (ML 5.7 central Italy).
Geophysical Journal International, 234(2):1326–1331, 03 2023.
[7] Cataldo Godano, Anna Tramelli, Giuseppe Petrillo, and Vincenzo Convertito. Testing the predictive power of b
value for Italian seismicity. Seismica, 3(1), 2024.
[8] Anna Maria Lombardi. A statistical framework for detection of b-value anomalies in Italy. Geophysical Journal
International, 237(2):729–740, 2024.
[9] Marcus Herrmann and Warner Marzocchi. Inconsistencies and lurking pitfalls in the magnitude–frequency
distribution of high-resolution earthquake catalogs. Seismological Research Letters, 92(2A):909–922, 2021.
[10] Laura Gulia and Stefan Wiemer. Real-time discrimination of earthquake foreshocks and aftershocks. Nature,
574(7777):193–199, 2019.
[11] Laura Gulia, Stefan Wiemer, Emanuele Biondini, Bogdan Enescu, and Gianfranco Vannucci. Improving the
foreshock traffic light systems for real-time discrimination between foreshocks and aftershocks. Seismological
Research Letters, 95(6):3579–3592, 2024.
[12] Francisco Martínez-Álvarez, Jorge Reyes, A Morales-Esteban, and Cristina Rubio-Escudero. Determining the
best set of seismicity indicators to predict earthquakes. Two case studies: Chile and the Iberian Peninsula.
Knowledge-Based Systems, 50:198–210, 2013.
[13] Mark Last, Nitzan Rabinowitz, and Gideon Leonard. Predicting the maximum earthquake magnitude from seismic
data in Israel and its neighboring countries. PLOS One, 11(1):e0146101, 2016.
[14] Lei Zhang, Langchun Si, Haipeng Yang, Yuanzhi Hu, and Jianfeng Qiu. Precursory pattern based feature extraction
techniques for earthquake prediction. IEEE Access, 7:30991–31001, 2019.
[15] Yang Zhao and Denise Gorse. Earthquake prediction from seismic indicators using tree-based ensemble learning.
Natural Hazards, pages 1–27, 2024.
[16] Wei Quan and Denise Gorse. Investigating the predictive power of seismic statistical features using ensemble
learning. PLoS One, 21(2):e0342765, 2026.
[17] Bertalan Bodri. A neural-network model for earthquake occurrence. Journal of Geodynamics, 32(3):289–310,
2001.
18

--- Sayfa 19 ---
Using Seismic Statistical Features and VQ-VAE to Improve Spatiotemporal Seismicity Predictability
[18] Emil Iliev Oynakov and Emil Aleksandrov Botev. Spatial and time variations of seismicity before strong
earthquakes in the southern part of the Balkans. Annals of Geophysics, 64(4):SE433–SE433, 2021.
[19] RE Habermann. Precursory seismic quiescence: past, present, and future. Pure and Applied Geophysics,
126(2):279–318, 1988.
[20] Matteo Picozzi, Antonio G Iaccarino, Daniele Spallarossa, and Dino Bindi. On catching the preparatory phase of
damaging earthquakes: an example from central Italy. Scientific Reports, 13(1):14403, 2023.
[21] Yumeng Hu, Qi Zhang, Hengshu Zhu, Baoshan Wang, Hui Xiong, and Haitao Wang. Scalable intermediate-term
earthquake forecasting with multimodal fusion neural networks. Scientific Reports, 15(1):9748, 2025.
[22] L Ma, L Zhu, and Y Shi. Attempts at using seismicity indicators for the prediction of large earthquakes by Genetic
Algorithm-Neural Network method. Proceedings of Asia-Pacific economic cooperation for earthquake simulation,
Brisbane Australia, 31:483–489, 1999.
[23] Ashif Panakkat and Hojjat Adeli. Neural network models for earthquake magnitude prediction using multiple
seismicity indicators. International Journal of Neural Systems, 17(01):13–33, 2007.
[24] Jorge Reyes, Antonio Morales-Esteban, and Francisco Martínez-Álvarez. Neural networks to predict earthquakes
in Chile. Applied Soft Computing, 13(2):1314–1328, 2013.
[25] A Morales-Esteban, F Martínez-Álvarez, and J Reyes. Earthquake prediction in seismogenic areas of the Iberian
Peninsula based on computational intelligence. Tectonophysics, 593:121–134, 2013.
[26] Stefan Wiemer and Max Wyss. Mapping the frequency-magnitude distribution in asperities: An improved
technique to calculate recurrence times? Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 102(B7):15115–15128,
1997.
[27] Steven C Jaumé and Lynn R Sykes.
Evolving towards a critical point: A review of accelerating seismic
moment/energy release prior to large and great earthquakes. Seismicity patterns, their statistical significance and
physical meaning, pages 279–305, 1999.
[28] Max Wyss and Ray Edward Habermann. Precursory seismic quiescence. Pure and Applied Geophysics, 126(2):319–
332, 1988.
[29] Mark V Matthews and Paul A Reasenberg. Statistical methods for investigating quiescence and other temporal
seismicity patterns. Pure and Applied Geophysics, 126(2):357–372, 1988.
[30] Khawaja M Asim, Adnan Idris, Talat Iqbal, and Francisco Martínez-Álvarez. Seismic indicators based earthquake
predictor system using Genetic Programming and AdaBoost classification. Soil Dynamics and Earthquake
Engineering, 111:1–7, 2018.
[31] Khawaja M Asim, Adnan Idris, Talat Iqbal, and Francisco Martínez-Álvarez. Earthquake prediction model using
support vector regressor and hybrid neural networks. PLOS One, 13(7):e0199004, 2018.
[32] Beno Gutenberg and Charles F Richter. Frequency of earthquakes in California. Bulletin of the Seismological
society of America, 34(4):185–188, 1944.
[33] Ahmad Zamani, Mohammad Reza Sorbi, and Ali Akbar Safavi. Application of neural network and ANFIS model
for earthquake occurrence in Iran. Earth Science Informatics, 6(2):71–85, 2013.
[34] Nicholas J van der Elst and Morgan T Page. a-positive: A robust estimator of the earthquake rate in incomplete or
saturated catalogs. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 128(10):e2023JB027089, 2023.
[35] Nicholas J van der Elst. b-positive: A robust estimator of aftershock magnitude distribution in transiently
incomplete catalogs. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 126(2):e2020JB021027, 2021.
[36] Deborah Novick and Mark Last. Using machine learning models for earthquake magnitude prediction in California,
Japan, and Israel. In International Symposium on Cyber Security, Cryptology, and Machine Learning, pages
151–169, 2023.
[37] Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 30, 2017.
[38] Yunzhi Shi, Xinming Wu, and Sergey Fomel. Waveform embedding: Automatic horizon picking with unsupervised
deep learning. Geophysics, 85(4):WA67–WA76, 2020.
[39] Cheng Yuan, Mingjun Su, Changkuan Ni, Xingye Liu, Yunze Xu, and Xiangli Cui. Horizon auto-picking with
quantitative uncertainty evaluation by using a modified vq-vae framework. Journal of Geophysics and Engineering,
19(4):788–806, 2022.
19

--- Sayfa 20 ---
Using Seismic Statistical Features and VQ-VAE to Improve Spatiotemporal Seismicity Predictability
[40] Randy Harsuko, Shijun Cheng, and Tariq Alkhalifah. Propagating the prior from shallow to deep with a pre-
trained velocity-model generative transformer network. Journal of Geophysical Research: Machine Learning and
Computation, 2(1):e2024JH000408, 2025.
[41] Siddharth Misra, Yusuf Falola, Polina Churilova, Rui Liu, Chung-Kan Huang, and Jose F Delgado. Deep learning
assisted extremely low-dimensional representation of subsurface earth. Available at SSRN 4196705, 2022.
[42] Kun Wang, Christopher W Johnson, Kane C Bennett, and Paul A Johnson. Predicting future laboratory fault
friction through deep learning transformer models. Geophysical Research Letters, 49(19):e2022GL098233, 2022.
[43] Maximilian Christ, Nils Braun, Julius Neuffer, and Andreas W. Kempa-Liehr. Time Series FeatuRe Extraction on
basis of Scalable Hypothesis tests (tsfresh – a Python package). Neurocomputing, 307:72–77, 2018.
[44] Qianlong Wang, Yifan Guo, Lixing Yu, and Pan Li. Earthquake prediction based on spatio-temporal data mining:
an LSTM network approach. IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing, 8(1):148–158, 2017.
[45] Aydın Do˘gan and Engin Demir. Structural recurrent neural network models for earthquake prediction. Neural
Computing and Applications, 34(13):11049–11062, 2022.
[46] Ankit Sonthalia, Sumanta Pasari, and Sonu Devi. Earthquake prediction using long short term memory on
spatio-temporally segmented data. In 2023 Third International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Smart
Energy (ICAIS), pages 1378–1382. IEEE, 2023.
[47] Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
[48] Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages 785–794, 2016.
[49] Tokuji Utsu. A method for determining the value of b in a formula log n = bm showing the magnitude-frequency
relation for earthquakes. Geophysical Bulletin of the Hokkaido University, 13:99–103, 2 1965.
[50] Masataka Ando. Source mechanisms and tectonic significance of historical earthquakes along the Nankai Trough,
Japan. Tectonophysics, 27(2):119–140, 1975.
[51] J. K. Gardner and L. Knopoff. Is the sequence of earthquakes in Southern California, with aftershocks removed,
Poissonian? Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 64(5):1363–1367, 10 1974.
20
