
--- Sayfa 1 ---
Note
This post-print corrects a minor typographic error in Algorithm 1 of
the published version: three instances of x were intended to be y.
Enhancing the statistical evaluation of earthquake
forecasts – An application to Italy
Jonas R. Brehmer
Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical Studies
Kristof Kraus and Tilmann Gneiting
Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical Studies
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT)
Marcus Herrmann and Warner Marzocchi
University of Naples, Federico II
February 3, 2026
Abstract
Testing earthquake forecasts is essential to obtain scientific information on fore-
casting models and sufficient credibility for societal usage. We aim at enhancing
the testing phase proposed by the Collaboratory for the Study of Earthquake Pre-
dictability (CSEP, Schorlemmer et al., 2018) with new statistical methods supported
by mathematical theory. To demonstrate their applicability, we evaluate three short-
term forecasting models that were submitted to the CSEP-Italy experiment, and two
ensemble models thereof. The models produce weekly overlapping forecasts for the
expected number of M4+ earthquakes in a collection of grid cells. We compare the
models’ forecasts using consistent scoring functions for means or expectations, which
are widely used and theoretically principled tools for forecast evaluation. We fur-
ther discuss and demonstrate their connection to CSEP-style earthquake likelihood
model testing, and specifically suggest an improvement of the T-test. Then, using
tools from isotonic regression, we investigate forecast reliability and apply score de-
compositions in terms of calibration and discrimination. Our results show where
and how models outperform their competitors and reveal a substantial lack of cal-
ibration for various models. The proposed methods also apply to full-distribution
(e. g., catalog-based) forecasts, without requiring Poisson distributions or making
any other type of parametric assumption.
Keywords. Calibration; earthquake count; forecast evaluation; reliability dia-
gram; scoring function.
1
Introduction
Earthquake forecasting has broad, manifold impact: It demarcates the interface between
seismology and society, being the basic scientific component of any sound seismic risk
reduction strategy; simultaneously, it is the ultimate scientific challenge for seismologists,
because it allows testing different hypotheses about earthquake occurrence processes.
Owing to the physical complexity of earthquake occurrence and our lack of knowl-
edge, earthquake forecasts are unavoidably probabilistic, meaning they provide the full
1
arXiv:2405.10712v2  [stat.AP]  2 Feb 2026

--- Sayfa 2 ---
or parts of the predictive distribution of future seismicity. To be of scientific and practi-
cal use, the earthquake forecasting enterprise must be intimately linked to a solid testing
phase, which allows seismologists to evaluate the reliability and predictive performance
of the forecasts and give them the necessary credibility they need for societal purposes.
Enhancing the testing phase of earthquake forecasts is the main motivation of this paper.
Presently, several flavors of physics-based (e.g., Cattania et al., 2018; Mancini et al.,
2019; Sharma et al., 2020; Dahm and Hainzl, 2022) or statistical (e.g., Gerstenberger
et al., 2005; Falcone et al., 2010; Lombardi and Marzocchi, 2010; Woessner et al., 2010;
Bayliss et al., 2020) models exist that issue such forecasts. To date, the most common
methods to evaluate the resulting model output are set by the Collaboratory for the
Study of Earthquake Predictability (CSEP) and rely on standardized prospective tests.
Prospective tests only use data gathered after the model was submitted to an experiment.
CSEP is a continuously evolving enterprise, both in the format of the forecasts and in the
set of tests. To preserve transparency and reproducibility, CSEP maintains the original
models’ forecasts and related data to allow any scientist to re-run the experiment with,
e.g., an updated set of tests. A key part of the CSEP testing strategy is an approach
that can be broadly termed earthquake likelihood model testing (Kagan and Jackson,
1995; Schorlemmer et al., 2007). In its original format, it partitions the testing region
into grid cells and assigns a log likelihood to each forecast, which comprises Poisson log
likelihoods for observed counts of earthquakes. Although similar in form, the approach
differs in crucial aspects from widely used statistical out-of-sample forecast evaluation
methods developed for count data in other scientific fields (Czado et al., 2009; Kolassa,
2016).
In this paper we aim at providing additional statistical procedures that are deeply
rooted in probability theory to evaluate and compare earthquake forecasts.
Specifi-
cally, we build on recent advances in Brehmer et al. (2024) and illustrate how CSEP’s
log likelihood-based testing method is related to consistent scoring (or loss) functions,
which are well-established tools from decision theory to compare forecast performance
(Gneiting and Raftery, 2007; Gneiting, 2011). Furthermore, we introduce methods pro-
posed by Gneiting and Resin (2023) to investigate a model’s reliability, and we apply
score decompositions in terms of calibration and discrimination capabilities. We use
the newly proposed tools to compare and analyze five forecasting models regarding the
operational earthquake forecasting (OEF) system in Italy (Marzocchi et al., 2014). The
final goal is to propose additional mathematical resources that may make the CSEP
testing phase stronger.
Terminology and technical settings matter, and to create an effective bridge between
different fields, here seismology and mathematics, we need to pay attention to fundamen-
tal concepts and terminology of the mathematical theory used, starting with the details
of the forecast format. Specifically, we consider forecasts of the number of earthquakes
in a given space–time–magnitude bin. As argued by Nandan et al. (2019), forecasting
models ought to embrace the full distribution of the number of earthquakes. However,
a full-distribution forecast can always be reduced to its mean or expected value, and it
is this simplified format on which we focus here. Thus, the forecast is a nonnegative
2

--- Sayfa 3 ---
36°N
38°N
40°N
42°N
44°N
46°N
48°N
 6°E
10°E
14°E
18°E
195
42
17
5
2
1
1
10
100
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
Magnitude
Count
Figure 1: Left: Forecast region of OEF-Italy (orange grid, 8993 grid cells, which corre-
sponds to the testing region of the Italian CSEP experiment) and locations of observed
M4+ target earthquakes (crossed circles) between 2005 April 16 and 2020 May 20; Right:
Logarithmic bar plot of earthquake magnitudes. For similar displays, see Figure 1 of
Herrmann and Marzocchi (2023), Figure 1 of Spassiani et al. (2023), and Figure 2 of
Brehmer et al. (2024).
real number, which represents a mean or expected count, and the respective outcome is
the observed count, which is a nonnegative integer. Evidently, short-term earthquake
forecasts operate within a low probability (Jordan et al., 2011) or low count environment,
where an overwhelming majority of the observed counts is zero. Serafini et al. (2022)
and Spassiani et al. (2023) consider an even simpler format, namely that of probability
forecasts for the binary event of at least one target earthquake occurring in any given
space–time–magnitude bin, to which we also relate. The setting of single-valued fore-
casts in the form of an expected count or number, on which we focus in this paper, fits
current practice at CSEP and allows for comprehensive comparisons.
Figure 1 depicts the Italian CSEP testing region in which the five models produce
forecasts in the form of the expected number of earthquakes in space–time–magnitude
bins. We term the first two models as LM (Lombardi and Marzocchi, 2010) and FCM
(Falcone et al., 2010). Both are ETAS models, but with customized structure and cali-
bration choices. The third model, termed LG (Lolli and Gasperini, 2003; Woessner et al.,
3

--- Sayfa 4 ---
2010), is based on the short-term earthquake probability (STEP) model (Gerstenberger
et al., 2005). These three models were evaluated in the Italian CSEP experiment (Taroni
et al., 2018, providing one-day ahead forecasts). The fourth model, SMA, is a weighted-
average ensemble of the previous three models and used in OEF-Italy (Marzocchi et al.,
2014); its weights are proportional to the inverse of the log likelihood of the observed
data following the score model averaging (SMA) rule and are continuously updated with
new observations. We additionally include a further weighted-average ensemble of the
three candidates, termed logistic regression-based weighted average (LRWA) (Herrmann
and Marzocchi, 2023), where the weighting is based on logistic regression (specifically,
the variant fit to M3+ earthquakes with fitting scheme #2, see their Appendix C).
The models issue forecasts in the form of the expected number of earthquakes with
magnitudes equal to or larger than four (M4+, the target threshold) in the next seven
days for each of the 8993 spatial grid cells of the testing region. On any given day, the
forecast is a collection of 8993 positive values which we denote via x(j)
c,t , where j represents
the model, c the grid cell, and t the day. To evaluate these forecasts, we consider M4+
target earthquakes that occurred between 2005 April 16 and 2020 May 26 in the testing
region. This yields 5520 days in total and results in 5514 days of forecast–observation
pairs. The observations yc,t represent the number of M4+ target earthquakes in grid cell
c during the seven-day period starting at t, and become available after day t + 6.
The models issue forecasts at 00:00 on each day and immediately after M3.5+ earth-
quakes. We do not consider the latter (intra-day) runs and thus obtain an equally spaced
sequence of forecasts in time. A crucial benefit of the expected counts format is that
forecasts can be aggregated spatially,1 as visualized in the top panel of Figure 2. We see
that the models vary in several dimensions. The respective forecasts have different back-
ground levels (top, bottom) and feature distinct spatial smoothness (bottom), though
they are strongly correlated with each other. In the next two sections we focus on termi-
nology and theoretical concepts, but also provide extensive analyses and demonstrations
based on these forecasts.
2
Comparative evaluation via consistent scoring functions
Consistent scoring functions are mathematically principled tools for the overall evalua-
tion, comparison, and ranking of competing forecast models. We take scoring functions
to be negatively oriented penalties that a forecaster wishes to minimize. In a nutshell, if
the forecast posits an expected count x and the count y realizes, the penalty is S(x, y).
In practice, scores are suitably averaged.
For instance, in the setting of OEF-Italy, which spatially coincides with the testing
region of the Italian CSEP experiment, there are C = 8993 grid cells and T = 5514 test
days. The total score of model j over the testing region and testing period from Figure 1
1The aggregation is simply by summation. For example, the expected count for the entire CSEP
testing region equals the sum of the expected counts for the 8993 grid cells. In contrast, full-distribution
forecasts do not allow for linear nor other straightforward types of aggregation from bins.
4

--- Sayfa 5 ---
0.3
1.0
3.0
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
Forecast value
LM
FCM
LG
SMA
LRWA
Observed earthquakes
Entire CSEP Italy Region
LM
FCM
LG
 6°E
12°E
18°E
 6°E
12°E
18°E
 6°E
12°E
18°E
36°N
40°N
44°N
48°N
SMA
LRWA
 6°E
12°E
18°E
 6°E
12°E
18°E
36°N
40°N
44°N
48°N
10−7
10−5
10−3
Forecast
value
Seven-Day Period Starting 2005 April 16
Figure 2: Expected number forecasts of the five models.
Top: temporal evolution,
aggregated over the testing region for each day; Bottom: spatial distribution for the
initial seven-day period in OEF-Italy, with forecast values below 10−7 represented in
white.
5

--- Sayfa 6 ---
is
¯S(j) = 1
T
T
X
t=1
¯S(j)
t ,
(1)
where
¯S(j)
t
=
C
X
c=1
S

x(j)
c,t , yc,t

(2)
is the spatially aggregated score for model j on day t. Considering all C grid cells and
T days, the total score considers n = C × T = 8993 × 5514 individual forecast cases in
OEF-Italy. Note that we use summation rather than averaging to define the spatially
aggregated score at (2), as the summation yields numerical values that are convenient
to report, compare, and interpret.
A key question then is which scoring function ought to be used, and we emphasize
that the choice needs to be mathematically consistent with the scope and format of
the forecast, which represents the a priori mean or expected number of earthquakes.
Despite our focus on forecasts in the form of expected counts, it is instructive to begin
the discussion in the setting of full-distribution forecasts.
2.1
Proper scoring rules for full-distribution forecasts
To fix the idea, let P be a full-distribution forecast for count data, such as the number of
earthquakes in a space–time–magnitude bin. Evidently, P is a probability distribution
on the set of the nonnegative integers. We adopt notation from Czado et al. (2009) and
denote its probability mass function by (pk)∞
k=0 and the respective cumulative distribu-
tion function (CDF) by (Pk)∞
k=0, where Pk = Pk
j=0 pj for any integer k ≥0.
In this setting, a scoring rule R(P, y) assigns a penalty based on the full-distribution
forecast P and the corresponding observed count y. The scoring rule R ought to be such
that
EY ∼QR(Q, Y ) ≤EY ∼QR(P, Y ),
(3)
where E denotes the expectation operator, P and Q are full-distribution forecasts, and
Y ∼Q specifies that Y is a random variable with distribution Q. Indeed, if Q is the
true (though typically unknown) distribution of the count, then the full-distribution
forecast Q ought to outperform any other forecast P in terms of the expected value of
the score. A scoring rule for which the expectation inequality in (3) is true for all P, Q
in a class P of probability distributions is said to be proper relative to P. If equality in
(3) occurs only when P = Q, the scoring rule is strictly proper. Propriety is an essential
characteristic of a scoring rule which encourages honest and coherent forecasts (Gneiting
and Raftery, 2007) and ensures that appropriate and complete usage of information is
rewarded (Holzmann and Eulert, 2014).
Key examples of proper scoring rules for count data include the logarithmic score,
which is defined as
R(P, y) = −log py
(4)
6

--- Sayfa 7 ---
and depends on the forecast P only through the probability mass py at the observed
count, and the ranked probability score,
R(P, y) =
y
X
k=0
P 2
k +
∞
X
k=y+1
(1 −Pk)2 = EY ∼P |Y −y| −1
2 EY ∼P |Y −Y ′|,
(5)
where Y and Y ′ are independent copies of a random variable with distribution P. The
representation at right in (5) holds whenever the distribution P has a finite (as opposed
to infinite) expected value, and it demonstrates that the ranked probability score can
be interpreted in terms of (fractional) counts. Czado et al. (2009) and Kolassa (2016)
provide detailed discussions of these and other proper scoring rules.
2.2
Consistent scoring functions for expected counts
In the context of forecasts of a mean or expected count, consistency is the equivalent of
propriety (Savage, 1971; Gneiting, 2011). Specifically, let P be the class of probability
distributions on the nonnegative integers with finite mean or expectation, and let P ∈P
have expectation µP . The scoring function S is consistent for forecasts of an expected
count if
EY ∼P S(µP , Y ) ≤EY ∼P S(x, Y )
(6)
for all distributions P ∈P and nonnegative numbers x. The scoring function is strictly
consistent if equality in (6) implies x = µP . Consistency ensures that reporting the truth
is an optimal strategy when forecasters are rewarded according to their realized scores,
and strict consistency guarantees that the true expectation µP is the only minimizer
of the expected score EY ∼P S(x, Y ). Hence, a forecast is preferred over its competitors
if it achieves lower average scores.
To see the connection to strictly proper scoring
rules, we note that if S(x, y) is a consistent scoring function in the sense of Eq. (6) then
R(P, y) = S(µP , y) is a proper scoring rule for full-distribution forecasts in the sense of
Eq. (3).2
Due to the condition (6) prescribed by consistency, it is an intricate question what
consistent scoring functions are available for expected counts. Summarizing results orig-
inally due to Savage (1971) and reviewed by Gneiting (2011) and Brehmer et al. (2024),
among others, the (strictly) consistent scoring functions for an expected count are of the
form
S(x, y) = ϕ(y) −ϕ(x) −ϕ′(x)(y −x) + h(y),
(7)
where x ≥0, y ∈{0, 1, . . .}, ϕ is a (strictly) convex function, ϕ′ is a subgradient of ϕ,
and h is an essentially arbitrary function.3
2Indeed, if P, Q ∈P then EY ∼Q R(Q, Y ) = EY ∼Q S(µQ, Y ) ≤EY ∼Q S(µP , Y ) = EY ∼Q R(P, Y ), which
demonstrates the claim.
3A subgradient is a generalization of a derivative; whenever a derivative exists, the subgradient is
unique and coincides with the derivative. For further technical discussion we refer to Section 3.1 of
Gneiting (2011), Section 2 of Brehmer et al. (2024), and Appendix A.1 in this current paper.
7

--- Sayfa 8 ---
Table 1: Predictive performance of forecast models for OEF-Italy in terms of the average
score ¯S from (1) under the Poisson scoring function at (9) and the quadratic scoring
function at (8). The best (lowest) score in each column is highlighted in green.
Score
Poisson
Quadratic
LM
2.71
0.8407
FCM
2.80
0.8459
LG
3.02
0.8465
SMA
2.73
0.8437
LRWA
2.69
0.8421
The most prominent example of a strictly consistent scoring function for an expected
value in the scientific literature is the quadratic scoring function
Squad(x, y) = (x −y)2 ,
(8)
which arises from ϕ(x) = x2 and h(y) = 0 in (7). This function is symmetric in the
sense that Squad(x, y) = Squad(y, x). Another valid choice of a convex function in (7) is
ϕ(x) = x(log x −1). Taking h(y) = −ϕ(y), this yields the Poisson scoring function Spois
defined by
Spois(x, y) = x −y log x
(9)
for expected counts x > 0 and observed numbers y ∈{0, 1, . . .} of target earthquakes,
which also is strictly consistent. The case x = 0 does not occur in typical practice, but
can be handled by assigning Spois(0, 0) = 0 and Spois(0, y) = +∞for y ∈{1, 2, . . .}.
For a connection to proper scoring rules, note that the logarithmic score at (4)
recovers the Poisson score at (9) when py is the probability mass of a Poisson distribution
with rate x > 0, save for terms that depend on the outcome y only. In other words,
Spois(x, y) corresponds to the log likelihood of a Poisson distributed random variable and
therefore is equivalent to the main evaluation function used in the earthquake likelihood
model testing approach (Schorlemmer et al., 2007). However, the connection is purely
formal, and the use of the Poisson scoring function neither explicitly nor implicitly
requires Poisson distributions or any other type of parametric assumptions, as pointed
out by Brehmer et al. (2024).
Both the quadratic and the Poisson scoring function
are members of the extended Patton family, which is an extension to count data of the
scoring functions proposed by Patton (2011). For details see Appendix A.2.
As Table 1 shows, the quadratic score and the Poisson score yield distinct rankings
of the five models. Under the quadratic scoring function, the LM model has the best
(lowest) score; under the Poisson scoring function the LRWA model shows the lowest
score.4 As there are many strictly consistent scoring functions, it is unclear whether
conclusions are reasonably stable with respect to the choice of scoring function.
In
4Differences between Tables 1–3 in this current paper and Table 1 in Brehmer et al. (2024), as well
as between Table 3 and Table 1 in Herrmann and Marzocchi (2023), stem from a corrected spatial
8

--- Sayfa 9 ---
investigating this stability, we rely on an alternative characterization of scoring functions
from Ehm et al. (2016). To this end, we define the elementary scoring function Sθ with
threshold parameter θ > 0, namely,
Sθ(x, y) =
 0,
x, y ≤θ or x, y ≥θ,
|y −θ|,
otherwise,
(10)
which arises from the classical representation (7) by choosing the convex function ϕ(x) =
max(x −θ, 0) and h(y) = 0. Thus, Sθ assigns a score of zero if the expected number x
and the observed count y lie on the same side of θ, and a score that equals the distance
between y and θ otherwise. We note that Sθ is a consistent, but not a strictly consistent,
scoring function since x = y is not the only minimizer of the score.
Remarkably, Sθ represents a cost–benefit scenario in a stylized decision problem
with a decision threshold at θ, where θ can be interpreted as the ratio of the socio-
economic cost of a preventive measure under consideration, such as an evacuation, over
the (monetized) benefit (per earthquake) of the measure, e. g., the number of saved
human lives (per earthquake). If the expected number of earthquakes x lies below the
threshold θ, the induced optimal decision is to take no action; if x is above θ, the induced
optimal decision is to apply the preventive measure.5 In this scenario Sθ(x, y) at (10)
is proportional to the difference of the cost or loss under the optimal decision induced
by the forecast x and the (hypothetical) cost under the optimal decision in hindsight
(Ehm et al., 2016, Section 3.1). Notwithstanding the crude simplifications in the stylized
decision problem, decision thresholds (only) take (very) small positive values in practical
problems of short-term forecasts of damaging earthquakes.
The results of Ehm et al. (2016) imply that subject to modest regularity conditions,
a consistent scoring function S for an expected count admits a representation of the form
S(x, y) =
Z ∞
0
Sθ(x, y) w(θ) dθ,
(11)
where w(θ) is a non-negative weight function that assigns relevance to the threshold
parameter θ > 0 for the elementary scoring function Sθ from (10). As noted by Taggart
(2022, p. 306), the score is “the weighted average of economic regret over user decision
thresholds, where the weight emphasises those decision thresholds in the corresponding
region of interest.” The scoring function S in (11) is strictly consistent if the weight
function w(θ) is strictly positive. If we put h(x) = 0, then the convex function ϕ in the
classical representation (7) and the weight function w in the nearly equivalent, but more
interpretable, representation (11) relate to each other in simple ways. Specifically, if ϕ
admits a second derivative ϕ′′, then w(θ) = ϕ′′(θ) for θ > 0. For example, the quadratic
scoring function at (8) arises from the choice ϕ(x) = x2, which yields the uniform weight
function w(θ) = ϕ′′(θ) = 2 for θ > 0, so all values of the decision threshold θ are
binning of earthquakes that occurred exactly on grid cell boundaries. Details are available at https:
//github.com/jbrehmer42/Earthquakes_Italy.
5Let c be the socio-economic cost of the preventive measure, and let b denote its monetized benefit
per earthquake. Then the measure ought to be undertaken if bx > c or x > c/b = θ.
9

--- Sayfa 10 ---
weighted equally. The Poisson scoring function at (9) arises from the convex function
ϕ(x) = x(log x −1), which yields the corresponding weight function w(θ) = ϕ′′(θ) = θ−1
for θ > 0, so small positive values of the decision threshold θ receive dominant weights.
Importantly, this analysis demonstrates that in the setting of earthquake forecasting,
the Poisson scoring function with its emphasis on small positive decision thresholds is
more relevant than the quadratic scoring function.
To investigate how forecast performance depends on the choice of the consistent
scoring function, we can plot a Murphy diagram. In the original form proposed by Ehm
et al. (2016), the Murphy diagram plots the average score (1) under the elementary
scoring function Sθ from (10) for the model(s) at hand as a function of the threshold
parameter θ. Here we adapt the Murphy diagram to the low probability and low count
setting of earthquake forecasts and introduce the logarithmic Murphy diagram, where
we plot against log(θ). Conveniently, the integral under a model’s logarithmic Murphy
curve equals its average Poisson score.6 If a model has a lower average elementary score
than its competitors for every choice of the threshold parameter θ, then it has superior
forecast performance with respect to all strictly consistent scoring functions for the mean.
Figure 3 shows a logarithmic Murphy diagram for the five OEF-Italy forecast models.
It is interesting to observe that each of the five models has certain ranges of θ under
which it performs best in terms of the average score under Sθ. The LM model shows
outstanding performance at larger values of θ and thus has the smallest average score
under the quadratic scoring function, which gives equal weight to all values of θ. The
LRWA ensemble model shows excellent performance across all values of θ and has the
smallest average score under the Poisson scoring function.
As we have argued, the
Poisson scoring function emphasizes performance at small values of θ that societally
are the most relevant, and a model’s average Poisson score equals the area under the
logarithmic Murphy curve.
2.3
The Diebold–Mariano test of equal predictive ability
Worthy of note, scoring functions rank the forecast models’ performance, but to make
formal statistical inference, additional procedures and assumptions are required.
To
check for statistically significant differences in forecast performance, we consider tests
of the (null) hypothesis of equal predictive performance for two models in terms of a
given scoring function S. For this purpose, we make use of the Diebold–Mariano test,
which is a carefully adapted Student’s t-test (Diebold and Mariano, 1995; Gneiting and
Katzfuss, 2014, Section 3.1).
Specifically, we consider the daily scores ¯S(j)
t
and ¯S(k)
t
of models j and k on day t from
(2), which are obtained after spatial aggregation, with the individual scores for the grid
cells summed up, and summarize forecast performance over the whole testing region for
6The claim follows immediately from our discussion of the representation (11) for the Poisson scoring
function and the fact that
R ¯Sθ d(log θ) =
R ¯Sθθ−1 dθ.
The average score (1) under the elementary
scoring function Sθ at (10) is identically zero for sufficiently small and sufficiently large values of θ, so
the integral is guaranteed to be finite.
10

--- Sayfa 11 ---
10−10
10−8
10−6
10−4
10−2
100
102
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
−23.0
−18.4
−13.8
−9.2
−4.6
0.0
4.6
θ
log(θ)
Elementary score
LM
FCM
LG
SMA
LRWA
Figure 3: Logarithmic Murphy diagram for the five forecast models. Each curve plots a
model’s total elementary score ¯Sθ from (1) versus log θ. Tickmarks at bottom indicate
log θ; tickmarks at top show θ. The colored bar at top indicates the model with the
lowest value of ¯Sθ. The integral under a model’s curve equals the average Poisson score
from Table 1.
one seven-day forecast period.7 The top panel in Figure 4 shows these daily scores based
on the Poisson scoring function Spois for the five forecast models. It uses a logarithmic
scale, because the daily scores are much larger for forecast periods t that contain M4+
target earthquakes, corresponding to counts yc,t ≥1 for at least one grid cell c. The
LM model generally performs worst on forecast periods without M4+ earthquakes, as
it possesses the highest daily scores for such t, and frequently performs best on forecast
periods with M4+ earthquakes, when it possesses low scores.
This is mirrored by the second panel in Figure 4, which shows the difference ¯S(j)
t
−¯S(k)
t
in the daily scores between the LM model (k), which we employ as reference throughout
the paper, and its competitors (j), again using the Poisson scoring function. In forecast
periods with M4+ earthquakes, the majority of the score differences are positive, so the
LM model attains the best scores and the FCM model the worst scores for these periods.
A look back at the top panel of Figure 2 provides a straightforward explanation: the
LM model issues the highest expected count forecasts, whereas the FCM model issues
the lowest forecasts. The bottom two panels in Figure 4 show the information gain (IG)
7Appendix C concerns spatial displays of Poisson score differences, obtained after temporal aggrega-
tion.
11

--- Sayfa 12 ---
and information gain per earthquake (IGPE) of the LM model over the other models.
As we prove analytically in Appendices B.1 and B.2, IG and IGPE are multiples of the
cumulative, spatially aggregated Poisson score difference between the model at hand
and the LM model. However, while IG can grow indefinitely, IGPE is normalized by the
cumulative number of observed target earthquakes and thus tends to stabilize over the
course of the evaluation period.
To check for statistically significant differences in forecast performance, we apply
the Diebold–Mariano test on the daily scores ¯S(j)
t
from (2), which operates under the
null hypothesis that model j and model k perform equally well in terms of the scoring
function S.8 If the null hypothesis is true, the test statistic
z(j,k) =
√
T
¯S(j) −¯S(k)
ˆσ(j,k)
(12)
has a standard normal distribution in the limit as the number T of testing times grows
larger.9 In (12), ˆσ2
(j,k) is an estimate of the variance of the daily score differences that
accounts for temporal dependencies and related effects (Diebold and Mariano, 1995),
namely,
ˆσ2
(j,k) = ˆγ(j,k)(0) + 2
L
X
l=1
ˆγ(j,k)(l)
(13)
where
ˆγ(j,k)(l) = 1
T
T
X
t=l+1
(¯S(j)
t
−¯S(k)
t
−¯d(j,k))(¯S(j)
t−l −¯S(k)
t−l −¯d(j,k))
and
¯d(j,k) = ¯S(j) −¯S(k).
The summation in the expression (13) for ˆσ2
(j,k) is over the sample autocovariance ˆγ(j,k)(l)
of the score differences at lags l up to an integer value L after which the score differentials
can be considered uncorrelated.
If L ≥1 then (13) applies; if L = 0 then ˆσ2
(j,k) =
ˆγ(j,k)(0). For OEF-Italy, we set L = 6 due to the overlap of the seven-day test periods
at lags up to six days.
A positive value of z(j,k) at (12) arises from a smaller average score for model k; a
negative value stems from a smaller average score for model j. From z(j,k), a one-sided
p value can be derived, namely,
p = 1 −Φ
 z(j,k)

,
(14)
8The Diebold–Mariano test applies not only under the Poisson score, but under any scoring rule or
scoring function, such as those discussed by Lerch et al. (2017), Serafini et al. (2022), Brehmer et al.
(2024), and Heinrich-Mertsching et al. (2024), among others.
9The standard normal distribution arises as the limit of the Student’s tν-distribution for an increasing
number of degrees of freedom ν. The number T of testing times needs to be sufficiently large for the limit
to be applicable; typically, values of T in the low thousands suffice. Note the stark and pleasant contrast
to the CSEP T-test: For the Diebold–Mariano test, we have theoretical guarantees of its validity (in
the sense described in the next footnote) in sufficiently large samples. For the CSEP T-test there are
no theoretical guarantees available. In fact, we are unaware of even a single setting in which the CSEP
T-test yields the required uniformity of the p-value under the null hypothesis.
12

--- Sayfa 13 ---
1
10
100
Poisson score
Number of
earthquakes
= 0
> 0
−100
−1
−0.01
0
0.01
1
100
Score difference
0
500
1000
1500
Information Gain (IG)
LM
FCM
LG
SMA
LRWA
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
IG per event
Figure 4: From top to bottom: Spatially aggregated daily Poisson score (2) for the five
forecast models; Daily Poisson score difference relative to the LM model; Cumulative
Poisson score difference or information gain (IG) of the LM model over the other models;
Information gain per earthquake (IGPE) of the LM model over the other models. In
the first two panels, two different markers are used: triangles for periods with one or
more M4+ target earthquakes, and circles otherwise. Note the logarithmic scale in the
upper two panels. All quantities are negatively oriented, i.e., the smaller the better for
the color-coded model. For technical details see Appendix B.1.
13

--- Sayfa 14 ---
Table 2: Diebold–Mariano test of the null hypothesis of equal predictive ability in terms
of the Poisson scoring function for the five forecast models. We show the respective
total Poisson score (diagonal), the z statistic (above diagonal), and the one-sided p
value (below diagonal). Columns identify model j and rows model k in the z statistic
at (12).
LRWA
LM
SMA
FCM
LG
LRWA
2.69
1.17
1.64
2.27
2.84
LM
0.12
2.71
0.60
1.56
2.45
SMA
0.05
0.27
2.73
2.46
3.05
FCM
0.01
0.06
0.01
2.80
2.83
LG
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
3.02
where Φ is the CDF of a standard normal random variable. Under the null hypothesis
of equal predictive ability in terms of the scoring function S the p value at (14) is
approximately uniformly distributed. A small value of p (typically, smaller than 0.01 or
0.05) allows for the rejection of the null hypothesis in favor of the alternative hypothesis
of superior predictive ability of model k; a large value of p (typically, larger than 0.95 or
0.99) suggests superior predictive ability of model j.
Table 2 shows the results for the five forecast models. The Diebold–Mariano test
rejects the null hypothesis of equal predictive ability in terms of the Poisson scoring
functions for all pairs of models, except for the pairs LRWA and LM, LM and SMA,
and LM and FCM. The LRWA ensemble model shows the best performance in terms of
the Poisson score, with score differences that are statistically significant, except for the
comparison to the LM model.
A valid test of significance10 generates p values that are uniform between 0 and 1 when
the null hypothesis is true, and shows power by rejecting the null hypothesis with high
probability when it is false (Lehmann and Romano, 2022). We now report on a simulation
experiment that demonstrates these desirable properties for the Diebold–Mariano test.
First, we consider two models for which the null hypothesis of equal predictive ability is
true. To achieve this, we define models MixA and MixB in the setting of OEF-Italy. At
any given time t, MixA chooses randomly between the FCM and the LG forecast, with
equal probability, whereas MixB uses the other forecast. Viewed as stochastic processes,
MixA and MixB have equal predictive ability.11 However, individual replicates of MixA
10We use the term valid test in the sense of satisfying conditions (3.10) and (3.14) in Lehmann and
Romano (2022), which conforms with typical practice throughout the scientific literature. By Lemma
3.3.1 in Lehmann and Romano (2022), these conditions guarantee the uniformity of the p value under
the null hypothesis.
11The equal predictive ability is immediate from the fact that the distribution of the random triple
(MixA, MixB, Y ) is the same as the distribution of the random triple (MixB, MixA, Y ).
14

--- Sayfa 15 ---
MixA vs. MixB
MixA vs. LM
MixB vs. LM
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
Figure 5: Histograms of p values for Diebold–Mariano tests of equal predictive ability
in terms of the Poisson scoring function for (Left) MixA versus MixB; (Middle) MixA
versus LM; and (Right) MixB versus LM, based on 400 replicates.
and MixB yield distinct scores. The histogram at left in Figure 5 shows the p values
that arise from 400 replicates of Diebold–Mariano tests of MixA (index j) versus MixB
(index k); as desired, the histogram is nearly uniform. The histograms at middle and
at right in Figure 5 show the p values in the 400 tests of MixA versus LM, and MixB
versus LM, respectively, which all lead to the rejection of the null hypothesis in favor of
superior predictive ability of the LM model.
2.4
Comparison to the CSEP T-test
At this stage, let us compare to the CSEP T-test, which also aims to compare the
predictive ability of two models. As proposed by Rhoades et al. (2011, Section 2.3), the
CSEP T-test of equal predictive ability is based on quantities called the information
gain (IG(j,k)) and the information gain per earthquake (IGPE
(j,k)) of model k over model
j, respectively. In Appendix B.2 we prove that
IG(j,k) = T

¯S(j) −¯S(k)
and
IGPE
(j,k) = T
NT

¯S(j) −¯S(k)
,
(15)
where NT = PT
t=1
PC
c=1 yc,t, are both multiples of the Poisson score difference ¯S(j)−¯S(k).
Table 3 illustrates the relationships between the total Poisson score, the Poisson score
difference, the information gain IG(j,k), and the information gain per earthquake IGPE
(j,k)
for our five forecast models, where the index k stands for the LM model, the index j for
the model at hand, and where T = 5514 and NT = 1834.
These relationships demonstrate two key insights. First, IG(j,k) and IGPE
(j,k) are per-
fectly valid tools for comparing the predictive performance of model forecasts in the
form of expected earthquake counts. Second, despite their derivation in terms of Pois-
son likelihoods in Rhoades et al. (2011), the use of IG(j,k) and IGPE
(j,k) does not depend on
the assumption of Poisson-distributed earthquake counts, nor does it rely on any other
parametric distributions. The only assumption that needs to be made is that the model
15

--- Sayfa 16 ---
Table 3: Predictive performance according to the total Poisson score (¯S(j)), the Poisson
score difference, information gain IG(j,k), and information gain per earthquake (IGPE
(j,k))
of the LM model (k) relative to the model at hand (j). The best (lowest) score in each
column is highlighted in green.
¯S(j)
¯S(j) −¯S(k)
IG(j,k)
IGPE
(j,k)
LM
2.71
0.000
0.000
0.000
FCM
2.80
0.084
463.572
0.253
LG
3.02
0.308
1697.038
0.925
SMA
2.73
0.020
111.393
0.061
LRWA
2.69
−0.018
−96.795
−0.053
forecasts represent expected counts in the technical sense of the expectation or mean
of a random variable, as pointed out previously (Brehmer et al., 2024). Importantly,
these arguments support the use of IG(j,k) and IGPE
(j,k) in much broader settings than
previously thought feasible.
As noted before, additional procedures and assumptions are required to make formal
statistical inference.
In this regard, the T-test proposed in Section 2.3 of Rhoades
et al. (2011) has shortcomings in the form of an incorrectly specified variance estimate.
As a consequence, the underlying test statistic has an incorrect standardization factor,
and the p value generated by the T-test generally fails to be uniform under the null
hypothesis of equal predictive ability. For details, we refer to Appendix B.3, where we
demonstrate these issues in displays analogous to Table 2 and Figure 5. In this light, we
recommend that the CSEP T-test be evolved into the Diebold–Mariano test based on
spatially aggregated Poisson scores. The two approaches rank models in the very same
way, but they differ in the statistical properties of the tests; only the Diebold–Mariano
test shows the desired standardization and, thus, the desired behavior under the null
hypothesis.
We hasten to emphasize that the CESP T-test and the Diebold–Mariano test are
closely related: They both are variants of the classical Student’s t-test, and if one corrects
for issues in the estimation of the variance as described in Appendix B.3, the CSEP T-
test morphs into the Diebold–Mariano test. Thus, we provide an improved version of the
CSEP T-test by taking care of clerical issues that have not received sufficient attention
thus far.
3
Calibration, reliability, and discrimination
Up to now we have focused on comparative evaluation of the models — we have asked
whether a model is better than its competitors. We now turn to the question of calibra-
tion and ask how well a model’s forecasts agree with the outcomes. Briefly, calibration is
a joint property of the forecasts and the outcomes that summarizes the degree of mutual
16

--- Sayfa 17 ---
consistency. It thus addresses the question whether a forecast provides reliable infor-
mation about the outcomes. This kind of testing has been originally named consistency
tests since the first CSEP-related studies (e.g., Werner et al., 2010) and their predecessor
(Schorlemmer et al., 2007); it puts the focus on formal statistical tests of the agreement
between forecasts and observations given specific parametric assumptions. In other sci-
entific fields, these types of questions have been addressed via the calibration concept
(e.g., Gneiting et al., 2007; Wei and Held, 2014; Gneiting and Resin, 2023). Similar to
CSEP’s consistency definition, calibration refers to the statistical consistency between
the forecasts and the observations. However, similar to the point process-oriented tech-
niques proposed by Bray and Schoenberg (2013), Thorarinsdottir (2013), and Bray et al.
(2014), our focus here is on calibration checks from a diagnostic perspective, where the
goal is to identify, and eventually remedy, model deficiencies.
3.1
Conditional calibration
Since our study deals with models that produce forecasts for the expected or mean
number of earthquakes, we ask whether the forecasts are mean-calibrated, i.e., whether
the forecasted means are consistent with the observed numbers of earthquakes. To state
this mathematically, we follow Gneiting and Resin (2023) and conceptualize in terms of
a random vector (X, Y ) where X is the forecast and Y the corresponding observation.
Then the forecast X is conditionally mean-calibrated, or simply calibrated, if
E(Y | X) = X
(16)
holds, i.e., if the conditional mean or expectation of the outcome, given any forecast
value X = x, equals x. In practice, mean-calibration implies, e.g., that, considering all
grid cells and days on which an expected count of x = 0.70 earthquakes is forecasted,
the number of observed earthquakes averages to 0.70.12 Hence, such a forecast is also
termed reliable. Naturally, no real-world model can provide perfectly calibrated fore-
casts, thus we are more interested in how much it deviates from the ideal in (16). The
problem of a model’s validation, which is a basic component of any scientific enterprise,
requires further work, because it should also consider epistemic uncertainty (Marzocchi
and Jordan, 2018). We intend to address this issue in future work.
3.2
Mean-reliability curves
In situations where the forecasts take only a few different values, it is straightforward
to check for mean-calibration by pooling forecasts with a specific value and, for each
such group, comparing to the corresponding average value of the outcomes. However,
mean-forecasts usually take arbitrarily different values, such that this approach is in-
appropriate without cumbersome and possibly subjective binning of the forecasts. The
recently developed CORP (Consistent, Optimally binned, Reproducible, and PAV al-
gorithm based) approach of Dimitriadis et al. (2021) and Gneiting and Resin (2023)
12In estimation problems, this type of property is commonly referred to as unbiasedness.
17

--- Sayfa 18 ---
Input: tuples (x1, y1), . . . , (xn, yn)
Output: calibrated values bx1, . . . , bxn
rearrange indices such that x1 ≤· · · ≤xn
partition into bins B1:1, . . . , Bn:n and let bxi = yi for i = 1, . . . , n
while there are bins Bk:i and B(i+1):l such that bx1 ≤· · · ≤bxi and bxi > bxi+1 do
merge Bk:i and B(i+1):l into Bk:l and let bxi = (yk + · · · + yl)/(l −k + 1) for
i = k, . . . , l
end
Algorithm 1: PAV algorithm based on forecast–outcome tuples (x1, y1), . . . ,
(xn, yn). The rearrangement of the indices allows for a succinct description of the
algorithm, which is adopted from Gneiting and Resin (2023, p. 3249).
addresses these issues and yields a mathematically principled, graphical assessment of
mean-calibration. While the initial development by Dimitriadis et al. (2021) concerned
probability forecasts of binary outcomes, we follow Gneiting and Resin (2023) in consid-
ering mean-forecasts of real-valued outcomes.
Given a set of forecast–observation pairs (x1, y1), . . . , (xn, yn) the CORP approach
uses nonparametric isotonic mean regression to calculate a sequence of (re) calibrated
values ˆx1, . . . , ˆxn, respectively. The nonparametric isotonic regression approach is im-
plemented by the classical pool adjacent violators (PAV) algorithm (Ayer et al., 1955;
de Leeuw et al., 2009).
As described in Algorithm 1, the PAV technique sorts the
forecast–observation pairs and then partitions the index set {1, . . . , n} into bins Bk:l =
{k, . . . , l} of consecutive integers, which are pooled in an iterative fashion, until mean-
calibration is achieved. The resulting nonparametric isotonic regression curve yields a
calibrated value ˆx for the original forecast value x. When viewed as a function of the
original forecast values, and interpolated linearly in between, the calibrated values form
a nondecreasing, piecewise linear curve that typically includes horizontal segments.
The calibrated value ˆx is an estimate of the conditional expectation E(Y | X = x)
and thus it should be close to x under the mean-calibration property in (16).
The
mean-reliability curve is the graph of the piecewise linear function that arises from
an interpolation of the points (x1, ˆx1), . . . , (xn, ˆxn), where we assume, for simplicity
of the description, that x1 ≤· · · ≤xn. Horizontal segments in a mean-reliability curve
then correspond to distinct forecast values xi ≤· · · ≤xj such that ˆxi = · · · = ˆxj.
A perfectly calibrated forecast has a mean-reliability curve directly on the diagonal.
Major deviations from the diagonal in the mean-reliability diagram indicate a lack of
mean-calibration and can be interpreted diagnostically.
In the spatio-temporal setting of earthquake forecasting, we have n = C × T and the
forecast–observation pairs (x1, y1), . . . , (xn, yn) correspond to the collection of tuples

x(j)
c,t , yc,t

c=1,...,C; t=1,...,T
with forecast values x(j)
c,t from model j and corresponding counts yc,t of target earth-
quakes. For an initial illustration, Figure 6 provides mean-reliability diagrams for the
18

--- Sayfa 19 ---
LM forecast and artificially manipulated variants thereof. As the forecast values are
mostly very small, the typical linear–linear diagram is hard to interpret in this setting.
Instead, we plot reliability diagrams on an empirical CDF scale on both the horizontal
and the vertical axes. Specifically, we use the empirical CDF of the forecast values over
all five models (LM, FCM, LG, SMA, and LRWA), all grid cells, and all test times to
scale the axes. For example, a linear value of 0.20 indicates the 20th percentile in this
aggregated distribution, and the tickmarks correspond to 0, 10−7, 10−6, 10−5, 10−4, and
the maximum 0.88 of the forecast values, respectively. The mean-reliability curve for the
LM model in the left panel is rather close to the diagonal, as desired, though it remains
below the diagonal, and in fact at zero, for forecast values up to about 3.3 · 10−6. The
same panel also shows the mean-reliability curve for the perfectly (re) calibrated LM
forecast (LM rc), which is directly on the diagonal, as enforced by the PAV algorithm.
The middle panel in Figure 6 shows mean-reliability curves that result from under-
forecasting and overforecasting, respectively. Specifically, the LM ×4 forecast multiplies
the expected count under the LM model by a factor of 4. This results in overforecasts,
with observed earthquake counts that are substantially lower on average than the ma-
nipulated forecast value and, therefore, a mean-reliability curve that is well below the
diagonal. The LM ×0.25 forecast divides the LM forecast by a factor of 4, which results
in underforecasts and a mean-reliability curve mostly well above the diagonal. The right
panel shows an overconfident variant of the LM model (‘LM overconf’) that issues fore-
cast values too far out in the tails, and an underconfident version (‘LM underconf’) that
pushes the forecast values away from the extreme tails.13 The mean-reliability curves
show the characteristic S-shape for an underconfident forecast, and the typical inverse
S-shape for an overconfident forecast, respectively.
Figure 7 shows reliability diagrams for the five forecast models. In practice, mean-
reliability curves deviate from the diagonal even when the hypothesis of mean-calibration
is true, for reasons of sampling variability alone. We use consistency bands to address
the question whether an observed deviation from the diagonal can reasonably be at-
tributed to random (sampling) fluctuations alone, despite the forecasts being calibrated.
Thus, the 90 per cent consistency bands in Figure 7 range (pointwise) from the 5th
to the 95th percentile of mean-reliability curves that are sampled under the hypothe-
sis of mean-calibration, using the method described in Appendix D. In addition to the
mean-reliability curves, we show histograms for the forecast values for the model at
hand, using the same empirical CDF scale based on all five models aggregated, as de-
scribed above and used for the mean-reliability curves. The LM model is well calibrated
as its mean-reliability curve fluctuates around the diagonal mostly within the 90 per
cent consistency band that quantifies the variation of the calibration curve under the
hypothesis of mean-calibration. In contrast, the calibration curves of the FCM, LG,
and SMA models oftentimes leave the consistency bands. Apart from the FCM model,
13Specifically, the LM overconf forecast agrees with LM ×0.25 for an LM model output ≤10−5 and
agrees with LM ×4 for an LM model output > 10−5. The LM underconf forecast agrees with LM ×4
for an LM model output ≤0.25 · 10−5, agrees with LM ×0.25 for an LM model output ≥4 · 10−5, and
equals 10−5 otherwise.
19

--- Sayfa 20 ---
Score  2.712
MCB   0.062
DSC   1.077
UNC   3.727
Score  2.649
MCB   0.000
DSC   1.077
UNC   3.727
Score  2.908
MCB   0.259
DSC   1.077
UNC   3.727
Score  3.309
MCB   0.660
DSC   1.077
UNC   3.727
Score  3.276
MCB   0.627
DSC   1.077
UNC   3.727
Score  2.895
MCB   0.225
DSC   1.056
UNC   3.727
10−7
10−5
10−4
10−7
10−5
10−4
10−7
10−5
10−4
10−7
10−5
10−4
Forecast value x
Mean-calibrated forecast value x^
LM rc
LM
LM x0.25
LM x4
LM underconf
LM overconf
Figure 6: Mean-reliability curves for the LM forecast and artificially manipulated vari-
ants thereof as described in the text, using an empirical CDF transform aggregated over
all models to scale the axes: original and (re) calibrated forecast (left); over- and under-
forecast (middle); over- and underconfident forecast (right). The tickmarks correspond
to non-transformed, original values of 0, 10−7, 10−6, 10−5, 10−4, and 0.88, respectively.
We also show the associated total Poisson score at (1) and its decomposition into miscal-
ibration (MCB), discrimination (DSC), and uncertainty (UNC) components from (19),
as described in Section 3.3.
20

--- Sayfa 21 ---
Score  2.712
MCB   0.062
DSC   1.077
UNC   3.727
Score  2.796
MCB   0.134
DSC   1.065
UNC   3.727
Score  3.020
MCB   0.110
DSC   0.817
UNC   3.727
LM
FCM
LG
10−7
10−5
10−4
10−7
10−5
10−4
10−7
10−5
10−4
10−7
10−5
10−4
Score  2.732
MCB   0.105
DSC   1.100
UNC   3.727
Score  2.694
MCB   0.076
DSC   1.109
UNC   3.727
SMA
LRWA
10−7
10−5
10−4
10−7
10−5
10−4
10−7
10−5
10−4
Forecast value x
Mean-calibrated forecast value x^
Histogram
Forecast value
(CDF transform)
Figure 7: Mean-reliability curves as in Figure 6, but for the five forecast models, along
with 90 per cent consistency bands (shaded), using an empirical CDF transform aggre-
gated over all models to scale the axes. The inset histograms depict the distribution of
a model’s forecast values after this transform.
21

--- Sayfa 22 ---
which frequently issues very small forecasts, as indicated by the spike at the lower range
of the inset histogram, small and moderate forecast values generally tend to be too large
(i.e., overforecasting) since the calibration curve is beneath the diagonal for small fore-
casted means, and large forecast values (on the CDF scale) tend to be too small (i.e.,
underforecasting), for a slight indication of underconfidence.
3.3
Miscalibration–discrimination (MCB–DSC) diagrams
As illustrated in Figures 6 and 7, mean-reliability curves allow for a diagnostic interpre-
tation of a model’s performance in terms of calibration. In a related development, and
also based on the CORP (re) calibration method, Gneiting and Resin (2023) introduce
a decomposition of the average score
¯S = 1
n
n
X
i=1
S(xi, yi)
(17)
for a collection (x1, y1), . . . , (xn, yn) of forecast–observation pairs that allows for an in-
terpretation in terms of (mis) calibration and discrimination ability.
Specifically, let
ˆx1, . . . , ˆxn denote the PAV (re) calibrated forecasts that correspond to x1, . . . , xn, re-
spectively, and let ˆxmg = 1
n
Pn
i=1 yi denote the overall (or marginal) mean, which serves
as a simple baseline mean-forecast. Given a consistent scoring function S we let
¯Src = 1
n
n
X
i=1
S(ˆxi, yi)
and
¯Smg = 1
n
n
X
i=1
S(ˆxmg, yi)
denote the average score of the (re) calibrated forecast and the marginal forecast, re-
spectively. We can then define the miscalibration (MCB), discrimination (DSC), and
uncertainty (UNC) components of the average score ¯S as
MCB = ¯S −¯Src,
DSC = ¯Smg −¯Src,
and
UNC = ¯Smg,
(18)
respectively. The MCB term compares the original forecast to the calibrated one, and
attains its minimal value of zero if, and only if, the original forecast is calibrated; the
DSC term compares the best constant forecast to the calibrated forecast, and attains
its minimal value of zero if, and only if, xi = x1 for i = 1, . . . , n (Gneiting and Resin,
2023). In other words, the MCB reflects how unreliable a model is, whereas the DSC
term reflects how well a model can sort out different scenarios (e. g., here especially back-
ground seismicity and triggered seismicity). The UNC term is independent of the issued
forecast values and quantifies the variability of the outcomes. All three components are
nonnegative and yield the CORP score decomposition
¯S = MCB −DSC + UNC.
(19)
Evidently, low MCB and high DSC terms are desirable, and a low average score ¯S might
stem from low MCB, or high DSC, or both. Analogously, a high average score might
stem from high MCB, or low DSC, or both.
22

--- Sayfa 23 ---
3 10
3.05
3.00
2.95
2.90
2.85
2.80
2.75
2.70
.6
LM
FCM
LG
SMA
LRWA
UNC = 3.73
Total Score
0.05
0.10
0.15
  0.80
  0.85
  0.90
  0.95
  1.00
  1.05
  1.10
0.68
0.67
0.66
0.65
0.64
0.63
0.62
LM
FCM
LG
SMA
LRWA
UNC = 0.70
Number Score
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.10
0.11
Miscalibration (MCB)
Discrimination (DSC)
Figure 8: MCB–DSC diagram for the five forecast models under the Poisson scoring
function, for (Left) the total score at (1) and (Right) the number score at (20). For the
pairs of models connected by (dotted) lines, the (two-sided) Diebold–Mariano test does
not reject the null hypothesis of equal predictive ability in terms of the Poisson scoring
function at the 0.10 significance level.
For an illustration of the decomposition (19) under the Poisson scoring function on
manipulated LM forecasts we return to Figure 6, where n = C×T. We note that the (re)
calibrated LM forecast shares DSC with the original LM model, but has lower (namely,
zero) MCB. The LM ×4 and LM ×0.25 forecasts also share DSC with the original LM
model, but have much larger MCB. These observations highlight that DSC only reflects
the relative context of a model’s forecast values. The ‘LM overconf’ and ‘LM underconf’
forecasts degrade MCB and/or DSC. Similarly, Figure 7 illustrates the decomposition
(19) for the five forecast models under the Poisson scoring function.
For a more succinct presentation of the CORP score decomposition at (19) we con-
sider miscalibration–discrimination (MCB–DSC) diagrams, as introduced in related con-
texts by Dimitriadis et al. (2023) and Gneiting et al. (2023). An MCB–DSC diagram
plots, for each model considered, DSC on the vertical axis versus MCB on the horizontal
axis. In view of the relationship at (19), models with an equal average score ¯S are rep-
resented on parallel lines with positive slope,14 and models at upper left in the diagram
score best, with low MCB and high DSC, whereas models at lower right score worst,
with high MCB and low DSC. Models that are located (roughly) on one of the parallel
lines have a similar average score but trade MCB for DSC, or vice versa. The left panel
14As the relationships in (15) demonstrate, these lines also indicate equal information gain, or equal
information gain per earthquake.
23

--- Sayfa 24 ---
in Figure 8 shows an MCB–DSC diagram for the five forecast models from Figure 7
using the total score (1). Accordingly, the inferior performance of the LG model stems
from a substantial lack of discrimination ability (evidently from Figure 4, it performs
well for quiescent periods, i.e., background seismicity, but worst during the sequences in
central Italy 2009 and 2016). The LRWA and LM models outperform their competitors
and show pleasant balance between calibration and discrimination. The differences in
the total score between the LRWA, LM, SMA, and FCM models are modest.
The right panel in Figure 8 shows an MCB–DSC diagram for spatially aggregated
model forecasts, as shown in the top panel of Figure 2. Specifically, the number score of
model j,
¯S(j)
# = 1
T
T
X
t=1
S
 C
X
c=1
x(j)
c,t ,
C
X
c=1
yc,t
!
,
(20)
is the average score of the spatially aggregated expected numbers of target earthquakes.15
In typical practice, analyses based on total scores as in (1) and analyses based on number
scores as in (20) yield similar, if not identical, model rankings. Yet, we prefer total scores
since comparisons of spatially aggregated forecasts in number scores ignore regional
differences in predictive performance. For example, a model that overforecasts in some
part of the testing region and underforecasts in another part gets penalized by the total
score in (1), but if the effects balance each other, the model’s deficiencies may not
be discernible from the number score in (20). In the spatially aggregated setting, the
number of forecast cases dwindles to n = T, as opposed to n = C × T for the total score
at the grid cell level. While the rankings of the five forecast models under the total score
and under the number score are identical, the LG model now lacks predominantly in
terms of MCB.
As noted, forecasts in the form of expected counts allow for aggregation at any desired
spatial and/or temporal level, and we encourage the development of multi-resolution
evaluation approaches in the spirit of Asim et al. (2023).
3.4
Comparison to existing CSEP methodology
Our focus in this section has been on diagnostics, where the goal is to identify, and even-
tually remedy, model deficiencies in terms of the notions of (mis) calibration, also referred
to as reliability, and discrimination ability. In contrast, extant CSEP methodology for
model evaluation has put the focus on formal statistical tests of agreement between
forecasts and outcomes, frequently under the label of earthquake likelihood model testing
15Interestingly, if there are no target earthquakes at a given time t, then the models’ contributions to
the total score equal their contributions to the number score. This follows from the fact that if S is the
Poisson scoring function at (9) then
¯S(j)
t
=
C
X
c=1
S(x(j)
c,t , yc,t) = S
 C
X
c=1
x(j)
c,t ,
C
X
c=1
yc,t
!
+
C
X
c=1
S
 
x(j)
c,t
PC
b=1 x(j)
b,t
, yc,t
!
−1.
The middle term on the right-hand side reduces to the constant 1 if yc,t = 0 for c = 1, . . . , C, which
proves the claim.
24

--- Sayfa 25 ---
(Kagan and Jackson, 1995; Schorlemmer et al., 2007). For example, the CSEP L-test,
CL-test, and N-test operate under the (questionable) joint hypothesis that the modeled
expected cell counts are correct, and that each observed count has a Poisson distribu-
tion. A model then might fail the test when either one or both of the hypotheses are
false. In particular, this happens when the expected cell counts are perfectly correct,
but the observed counts do not come from the Poisson distribution. Conversely, while a
passed test expresses the fact that there is no evidence against either of the hypotheses,
a model might pass the test, and yet be inferior to competitors that fail the test. Thus,
the outcomes of these tests may be misleading, except for cases where the model issues
full-distribution forecasts that are explicitly Poisson distributions.
The Poisson assumption was avoided by Savran et al. (2020), who tested full-distribu-
tion (i.e., catalog-based) earthquake forecasts with nonparametric analogs to the grid-
based CSEP tests (N-, M-, L-, and S-test). These tests were implemented in (py)CSEP
(Savran et al., 2022), but they only address consistency/calibration of full-distribution
forecasts, not comparative evaluations. The tools proposed in our paper are also non-
parametric and do not rely on a Poisson assumption. They are straightforward to imple-
ment and, in addition to model ranking via scoring functions, they can be used diagnos-
tically, via mean-reliability curves and MCB–DSC diagrams, to identify, and eventually
remedy, model deficiencies. In addition, the proposed methods facilitate comparing also
full-distribution forecasts.
Worthy of note, as for the current CSEP testing implementation, both calibration
and consistency tests do not account for the so-called epistemic uncertainty, considering
only one model or the (weighted) mean of a set of models. The consequences of that have
been discussed in depth by Marzocchi and Jordan (2014). Here we just mention that
a proper model validation can be made only considering such an uncertainty. Hence,
model consistency and calibration have mostly an heuristic value that tells us how much
and how the observations deviate from the forecasts.
4
Conclusion
In this study we considered short-term earthquake forecasting models for the Italian
CSEP testing region and evaluated their forecasts (in the form of expected earthquake
counts) with consistent scoring functions, mean-reliability diagrams, and miscalibration–
discrimination (MCB–DSC) diagrams. We illustrated that evaluation methods based on
scoring functions offer a comprehensive assessment of the models. They yield a broader
perspective on the existing CSEP testing framework and provide a valuable tool box for
earthquake model assessment. Specifically, we make the following recommendations.
• There are many consistent scoring functions for forecasts in the format of expected
counts, with the Poisson score playing a distinguished role in low probability en-
vironments.
Use Murphy diagrams to consider all consistent scoring functions
simultaneously; the area under a logarithmic Murphy curve equals the average
Poisson score.
25

--- Sayfa 26 ---
• Retain the established practice of binary model comparisons via the information
gain per earthquake (IGPE: Vere-Jones, 2003; Harte and Vere-Jones, 2005; Rhoades
et al., 2011) measure. The IGPE measure equals (up to a factor) the difference in
the average Poisson score (Eq. 15) and is much broader applicable than previously
thought, as its use does not depend on any parametric assumptions.
• If formal inference is the goal, which depends on accurate uncertainty quantifica-
tion, replace the CSEP T-test by its close relative, the Diebold–Mariano test based
on spatially aggregated scores, which comprehensively accounts for sampling vari-
ability.
• Use mean-reliability curves as a diagnostic tool to assess calibration.
• An average score ¯S can be decomposed into MCB, DSC, and UNC components.
Compare and investigate them for multiple models in MCB–DSC diagrams.
Importantly, the evaluation methods proposed here are model-agnostic, i.e., they can be
applied to any type of forecast (in the form of expected earthquake counts), regardless
of the model or technique that produced them. Forecast and data characteristics such as
spatial-temporal clustering and heavy tailed distributions affect the intrinsic variability
in these methods, which gets quantified via the denominator in the Diebold–Mariano
statistic (12) and consistency bands in mean-reliability diagrams. While further work in
these directions may be the focus of future research, we are confident that these tools
will help pave the way to improvements in the evaluation, selection, and development of
earthquake forecasting models.
It is important to stress that our results hold only in terms of mean-forecasts. In
particular, we do not claim that the LRWA and LM models are superior in all facets.
The results indicate that they are slightly better at producing mean-forecasts for the
number of earthquakes. A key reason for this is that the forecasts of the LM model are
well-calibrated and overall higher than the forecasts of its competitors. Hence, the LM
model is not as severely underforecasting as the LG and FCM models on days when
(many) earthquakes happen.
As emphasized by Nandan et al. (2019) it would be best if these forecasts specified
the full distribution of earthquake counts, as this provides most information on the likely
implications of different actions. Yet, full-distribution forecasts may not be available due
to their complexity, reporting traditions, ease of forecast communication, or the need for
aggregation. However, full-distribution forecasts can be supplied in the form of a col-
lection of synthetic catalogs (also called stochastic event sets) of future earthquakes.16
Importantly, if collections of synthetic catalogs are interpreted as full-distribution fore-
casts, we can deduce mutually consistent full (empirical) distribution forecasts at any
desired level of spatial and/or temporal aggregation. The evaluation methods proposed
in this paper also apply to full-distribution forecasts, by converting them to the implied
mean-forecasts, as implemented here, which does not require smoothing nor parametric
assumptions.
16In their experiments, Nandan et al. (2019) use a collection of five million synthetic catalogs.
26

--- Sayfa 27 ---
Data Availability
The tables and figures were produced with R (R Core Team, 2024). Code for reproduc-
tion is available on https://github.com/jbrehmer42/Earthquakes_Italy, where we
also provide details on slight differences to previously reported scores (see footnote 4 de-
scribing Table 1). Data are available from Marcus Herrmann (marcus.herrmann@unina.it)
upon request.
Acknowledgments
Jonas Brehmer, Tilmann Gneiting, and Kristof Kraus are grateful for support by the
Klaus Tschira Foundation. Marcus Herrmann and Warner Marzocchi were supported
by the ‘Multi-Risk sciEnce for resilienT commUnities undeR a changiNg climate’ (RE-
TURN) project, funded by the European Union’s NextGenerationEU and the Italian
Ministry of University and Research (MUR) under the National Recovery and Resilience
Plan (PNRR; Code PE0000005). We thank two anonymous reviewers, Johannes Bracher,
Alexander Jordan, and Johannes Resin for helpful discussions and remarks.
References
Asim, K. M., Hainzl, S., Schorlemmer, D., Iturrieta, P., Bayona, J. A., Savran, W. H.,
Werner, M. and Marzocchi, W. (2023). Statistical power of spatial earthquake forecast
tests. Geophysical Journal International, 233, 2053–2066. URL https://doi.org/
10.1093/gji/ggad030.
Ayer, M., Brunk, H. D., Ewing, G. M., Reid, W. T. and Silverman, E. (1955). An empir-
ical distribution function for sampling with incomplete information. Annals of Mathe-
matical Statistics, 26, 641–647. URL https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177728423.
Bayliss, K., Naylor, M., Illian, J. and Main, I. G. (2020). Data-driven optimization of
seismicity models using diverse data sets: Generation, evaluation, and ranking using
Inlabru. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 125, e2020JB020226. URL
https://doi.org/10.1029/2020JB020226.
Bray, A. and Schoenberg, F. P. (2013). Assessment of point process models for earth-
quake forecasting. Statistical Science, 28, 510–520. URL https://doi.org/10.1214/
13-STS440.
Bray, A., Wong, K., Barr, C. D. and Schoenberg, F. P. (2014). Voronoi residual anal-
ysis of spatial point process models with applications to California earthquake fore-
casts. Annals of Applied Statistics, 8, 2247–2267. URL https://doi.org/10.1214/
14-AOAS767.
Brehmer, J. R., Gneiting, T., Herrmann, M., Marzocchi, W., Schlather, M. and Strokorb,
K. (2024). Using scoring functions to evaluate point process forecasts. Annals of the
27

--- Sayfa 28 ---
Institute of Statistical Mathematics, 76, 47–71.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10463-023-00875-5.
Cattania, C., Werner, M. J., Marzocchi, W., Hainzl, S., Rhoades, D., Gerstenberger,
M., Liukis, M., Savran, W., Christophersen, A., Helmstetter, A., Jimenez, A., Steacy,
S. and Jordan, T. H. (2018). The forecasting skill of physics-based seismicity models
during the 2010–2012 Canterbury, New Zealand, earthquake sequence. Seismological
Research Letters, 89, 1238–1250. URL https://doi.org/10.1785/0220180033.
Czado, C., Gneiting, T. and Held, L. (2009). Predictive model assessment for count
data. Biometrics, 65, 1254–1261. URL https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1541-0420.
2009.01191.x.
Dahm, T. and Hainzl, S. (2022).
A Coulomb stress response model for time-
dependent earthquake forecasts. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 127,
e2022JB024443. URL https://doi.org/10.1029/2022JB024443.
de Leeuw, J., Hornik, K. and Mair, P. (2009). Isotone optimization in R: Pool-Adjacent-
Violators Algorithm (PAVA) and active set methods. Journal of Statistical Software,
32, 1–24. URL https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v032.i05.
Diebold, F. X. and Mariano, R. S. (1995). Comparing predictive accuracy. Journal
of Business & Economic Statistics, 13, 253–263. URL https://doi.org/10.1198/
073500102753410444.
Dimitriadis, T., Gneiting, T., Jordan, A. and Vogel, P. (2023). Evaluating probabilistic
classifiers: The triptych. International Journal of Forecasting. URL https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijforecast.2023.09.007.
Dimitriadis, T., Gneiting, T. and Jordan, A. I. (2021).
Stable reliability diagrams
for probabilistic classifiers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 118, e2016191118. URL https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
2016191118.
Ehm, W., Gneiting, T., Jordan, A. and Kr¨uger, F. (2016). Of quantiles and expectiles:
Consistent scoring functions, Choquet representations and forecast rankings. Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B. Statistical Methodology, 78, 505–562. URL
https://doi.org/10.1111/rssb.12154.
Falcone, G., Console, R. and Murru, M. (2010). Short-term and long-term earthquake
occurrence models for Italy: ETES, ERS and LTST. Annals of Geophysics, 53, 41–50.
URL https://doi.org/10.4401/ag-4760.
Gerstenberger, M. C., Wiemer, S., Jones, L. M. and Reasenberg, P. A. (2005). Real-
time forecasts of tomorrow’s earthquakes in California. Nature, 435, 328–331. URL
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03622.
28

--- Sayfa 29 ---
Gneiting, T. (2011). Making and evaluating point forecasts. Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 106, 746–762. URL https://doi.org/10.1198/jasa.2011.
r10138.
Gneiting, T., Balabdaoui, F. and Raftery, A. E. (2007). Probabilistic forecasts, cal-
ibration and sharpness. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statisti-
cal Methodology, 69, 243–268. URL https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9868.2007.
00587.x.
Gneiting, T. and Katzfuss, M. (2014).
Probabilistic forecasting.
Annual Review
of Statistics and Its Application, 1, 125–151.
URL https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev-statistics-062713-085831.
Gneiting, T. and Raftery, A. E. (2007). Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, and
estimation.
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 102, 359–378.
URL
https://doi.org/10.1198/016214506000001437.
Gneiting, T. and Resin, J. (2023). Regression diagnostics meets forecast evaluation: Con-
ditional calibration, reliability diagrams, and coefficient of determination. Electronic
Journal of Statistics, 17, 3226–3286. URL https://doi.org/10.1214/23-EJS2180.
Gneiting, T., Wolffram, D., Resin, J., Kraus, K., Bracher, J., Dimitriadis, T., Ha-
genmeyer, V., Jordan, A. I., Lerch, S., Phipps, K. and Schienle, M. (2023).
Model diagnostics and forecast evaluation for quantiles.
Annual Review of
Statistics and Its Application, 10, 597–621.
URL https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev-statistics-032921-020240.
Harte, D. and Vere-Jones, D. (2005).
The entropy score and its uses in earthquake
forecasting. Pure and Applied Geophysics, 162, 1229–1253. URL https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00024-004-2667-2.
Heinrich-Mertsching, C., Thorarinsdottir, T. L., Guttorp, P. and Schneider, M. (2024).
Validation of point process predictions with proper scoring rules. Scandinavian Journal
of Statistics, 51, 1533–1566. URL https://doi.org/10.1111/sjos.12736.
Herrmann, M. and Marzocchi, W. (2023). Maximizing the forecasting skill of an ensemble
model. Geophysical Journal International, 234, 73–84. URL https://doi.org/10.
1093/gji/ggad020.
Holzmann, H. and Eulert, M. (2014). The role of the information set for forecasting —
with applications to risk management. Annals of Applied Statistics, 8, 595–621. URL
https://doi.org/10.1214/13-AOAS709.
Jordan, T. H., Chen, Y.-T., Gasparini, P., Madariaga, R., Main, I., Marzocchi, W.,
Papadopoulos, G., Sobolev, G., Yamaoka, K. and Zschau, J. (2011).
Operational
earthquake forecasting. State of knowledge and guidelines for utilization. Annals of
Geophysics, 54, 316–391. URL https://doi.org/10.4401/ag-5350.
29

--- Sayfa 30 ---
Kagan, Y. Y. and Jackson, D. D. (1995).
New seismic gap hypothesis: Five years
after. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 100, 3943–3959. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1029/94JB03014.
Kolassa, S. (2016). Evaluating predictive count data distributions in retail sales fore-
casting. International Journal of Forecasting, 32, 788–803. URL https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijforecast.2015.12.004.
Lehmann, E. L. and Romano, J. P. (2022).
Testing Statistical Hypotheses.
4th ed.
Springer. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-70578-7.
Lerch, S., Thorarinsdottir, T. L., Ravazzolo, F. and Gneiting, T. (2017). Forecaster’s
dilemma: Extreme events and forecast evaluation. Statistical Science, 32, 106–127.
URL https://doi.org/10.1214/16-STS588.
Lolli, B. and Gasperini, P. (2003). Aftershocks hazard in Italy. Part I: Estimation of
time-magnitude distribution model parameters and computation of probabilities of
occurrence. Journal of Seismology, 7, 235–257. URL https://doi.org/10.1023/A:
1023588007122.
Lombardi, A. M. and Marzocchi, W. (2010). The ETAS model for daily forecasting of
Italian seismicity in the CSEP experiment. Annals of Geophysics, 53, 155–164. URL
https://doi.org/10.4401/ag-4848.
Mancini, S., Segou, M., Werner, M. J. and Cattania, C. (2019). Improving physics-based
aftershock forecasts during the 2016–2017 Central Italy earthquake cascade. Journal
of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 124, 8626–8643. URL https://doi.org/10.
1029/2019JB017874.
Marzocchi, W. and Jordan, T. H. (2014). Testing for ontological errors in probabilis-
tic forecasting models of natural systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 111, 11973–11978. URL https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1410183111.
Marzocchi, W. and Jordan, T. H. (2018). Experimental concepts for testing probabilistic
earthquake forecasting and seismic hazard models. Geophysical Journal International,
215, 780–798. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/gji/ggy276.
Marzocchi, W., Lombardi, A. M. and Casarotti, E. (2014). The establishment of an
operational earthquake forecasting system in Italy. Seismological Research Letters,
85, 961–969. URL https://doi.org/10.1785/0220130219.
Nandan, S., Ouillon, G., Sornette, D. and Wiemer, S. (2019).
Forecasting the full
distribution of earthquake numbers is fair, robust, and better. Seismological Research
Letters, 90, 1650–1659. URL https://doi.org/10.1029/2022JB024380.
Patton, A. J. (2011).
Volatility forecast comparison using imperfect volatility prox-
ies.
Journal of Econometrics, 160, 246–256.
URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jeconom.2010.03.034.
30

--- Sayfa 31 ---
R Core Team (2024). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foun-
dation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL https://www.R-project.
org/.
Rhoades, D., Schorlemmer, D., Gerstenberger, M., Christophersen, A., Zechar, J. D. and
Imoto, M. (2011). Efficient testing of earthquake forecasting models. Acta Geophysica,
59, 728–747. URL https://doi.org/10.2478/s11600-011-0013-5.
Savage, L. J. (1971). Elicitation of personal probabilities and expectations. Journal of
the American Statistical Association, 66, 783–801. URL https://doi.org/10.2307/
2284229.
Savran, W. H., Bayona, J. A., Iturrieta, P., Asim, K. M., Bao, H., Bayliss, K., Herrmann,
M., Schorlemmer, D., Maechling, P. J. and Werner, M. J. (2022). pycsep: a python
toolkit for earthquake forecast developers. Seismological Society of America, 93, 2858–
2870. URL https://doi.org/10.1785/0220220033.
Savran, W. H., Werner, M. J., Marzocchi, W., Rhoades, D. A., Jackson, D. D., Milner,
K., Field, E. and Michael, A. (2020). Pseudoprospective evaluation of UCERF3-ETAS
forecasts during the 2019 Ridgecrest sequence. Bulletin of the Seismological Society
of America, 110, 1799–1817. URL https://doi.org/10.1785/0120200026.
Schorlemmer, D., Gerstenberger, M., Wiemer, S. and Jackson, D. (2007). Earthquake
likelihood model testing.
Seismological Research Letters, 78, 17–29.
URL https:
//doi.org/10.1785/gssrl.78.1.17.
Schorlemmer, D., Werner, M. J., Marzocchi, W., Jordan, T. H., Ogata, Y., Jack-
son, D. D., Mak, S., Rhoades, D. A., Gerstenberger, M. C., Hirata, N., Liukis,
M., Maechling, P. J., Strader, A., Taroni, M., Wiemer, S., Zechar, J. D. and
Zhuang, J. (2018). The Collaboratory for the Study of Earthquake Predictability:
Achievements and priorities.
Seismological Research Letters, 89, 1305–1313.
URL
https://doi.org/10.1785/0220180053.
Serafini, F., Naylor, M., Lindgren, F., Werner, M. J. and Main, I. (2022). Ranking
earthquake forecasts using proper scoring rules: Binary events in a low probability
environment.
Geophysical Journal International, 230, 1419–1440.
URL https://
doi.org/10.1093/gji/ggac124.
Sharma, S., Hainzl, S., Z¨oeller, G. and Holschneider, M. (2020). Is Coulomb stress the
best choice for aftershock forecasting? Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth,
125, e2020JB019553. URL https://doi.org/10.1029/2020JB019553.
Spassiani, I., Falcone, G., Murru, M. and Marzocchi, W. (2023). Operational earth-
quake forecasting in Italy: Validation after 10 yr of operativity. Geophysical Journal
International, 234, 2501–2518. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/gji/ggad256.
31

--- Sayfa 32 ---
Taggart, R. (2022). Evaluation of point forecasts for extreme events using consistent
scoring functions. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 148, 306–
320. URL https://doi.org/10.1002/qj.4206.
Taroni, M., Marzocchi, W., Schorlemmer, D., Werner, M. J., Wiemer, S., Zechar, J. D.,
Heiniger, L. and Euchner, F. (2018). Prospective CSEP evaluation of 1-day, 3-month,
and 5-yr earthquake forecasts for Italy. Seismological Research Letters, 89, 1251–1261.
URL https://doi.org/10.1785/0220180031.
Thorarinsdottir, T. L. (2013). Calibration diagnostics for point process models via the
probability integral transform. Stat, 2, 150–158. URL https://doi.org/10.1002/
sta4.25.
Vere-Jones, D. (2003). Selected Papers from Volume 30 of Vychislitel’naya Seysmologiya,
chap. Probabilities and information gain for earthquake forecasting. American Geo-
physical Union, 104–114. URL https://doi.org/10.1029/CS005p0104.
Wei, W. and Held, L. (2014). Calibration tests for count data. Test, 23, 787–805. URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11749-014-0380-8.
Werner, M. J., Zechar, J. D., Marzocchi, W., Wiemer, S. and the CSEP-Italy Working
Group (2010).
Retrospective evaluation of the five-year and ten-year CSEP-Italy
earthquake forecasts. Annals of Geophysics, 53, 11–30. URL https://doi.org/10.
4401/ag-4840.
Wilks, D. (2016). “The stippling shows statistically significant grid points”: How re-
search results are routinely overstated and overinterpreted, and what to do about
it.
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 97, 2263–2273.
URL https:
//doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-D-15-00267.1.
Woessner, J., Christophersen, A., Zechar, J. D. and Monelli, D. (2010). Building self-
consistent, short-term earthquake probability (STEP) models: Improved strategies
and calibration procedures. Annals of Geophysics, 53, 141–154. URL https://doi.
org/10.4401/ag-4812.
Zhang, L., Mai, P. M., Thingbaijam, K. K., Razafindrakoto, H. N. and Genton, M. G.
(2015). Analysing earthquake slip models with the spatial prediction comparison test.
Geophysical Journal International, 200, 185–198. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/
gji/ggv088.
32

--- Sayfa 33 ---
Appendices
A
Consistent scoring functions
A.1
Technical details for the Bregman representation
Consider the Bregman representation (7), namely,
S(x, y) = ϕ(y) −ϕ(x) −ϕ′(x)(y −x),
for a scoring function that is consistent for the mean-functional.
For simplicity we
ignore the function h(y), and we recall that ϕ is a convex function with subgradient ϕ′.
Regarding our setting of count data, where the mean-forecast x ≥0 is a nonnegative
number, whereas the outcome y ∈{0, 1, . . .} is a nonnegative integer, we distinguish
three cases for this representation.
In case I the convex function ϕ is continuous and differentiable on the nonnegative
halfaxis with ϕ(0) and ϕ′(0) being real numbers. A key example is ϕ(x) = xb for b > 1.
Then the score S(x, y) is well-defined and finite for all x ≥0 and y ∈{0, 1, . . .}.
In case II the convex function ϕ is defined on the strictly positive halfaxis with
ϕ(0) = limx↓0 ϕ(x) being finite, but ϕ′(0) = limx↓0 ϕ′(x) = −∞.
A key example is
ϕ(x) = −xb for 0 < b < 1. Then the score S(x, y) is well-defined and finite for x > 0
and y ∈{0, 1, . . .}. To allow for the mean-forecast x = 0, we define S(0, 0) = 0 and
S(0, y) = +∞for y ∈{1, 2, . . .}, which retains consistency.
In case III the convex function ϕ is defined on the strictly positive halfaxis with
ϕ(0) = limx↓0 ϕ(x) = +∞and ϕ′(0) = limx↓0 ϕ′(x) = −∞. A key example is ϕ(x) = xb
for b < 0. Then the score S(x, y) is well-defined and finite for x > 0 and y ∈{1, 2, . . .},
but there is no obvious extension that maintains consistency.
A.2
Extended Patton family of consistent scoring functions
The original Patton family of consistent scoring functions for an expected value (Patton,
2011) is parameterized in terms of a real-valued index b and defined via
Sb(x, y) =















yb −xb
b(b −1) −xb−1
b −1(y −x),
b /∈{0, 1},
y
x −log y
x −1,
b = 0,
y log y
x −(y −x),
b = 1,
(A.1)
for an expected value x > 0 and an outcome y > 0. The members Sb of the Patton
family are strictly consistent scoring functions for an expected value, as they are of the
33

--- Sayfa 34 ---
form (7) with the strictly convex function
ϕb(x) =









xb
b(b −1),
b /∈{0, 1},
−log x,
b = 0,
x log x,
b = 1,
(A.2)
and a certain choice of h(y). The Patton family nests both the Poisson scoring function
(b = 1) at (9) and the quadratic scoring function (b = 2) at (8), up to a constant factor
and terms that only depend on y. However, the specific choice of h(y) yields expressions
for Sb(x, y) that can be undefined when x = 0 or y = 0, and so the Patton functions
need to be modified to evaluate forecasts of earthquake counts.
To accommodate count data, while retaining the nesting property, we define the
extended Patton family via
S0
b(x, y) = Sb(x, y) −Sb(1, y) + 1
2yb −b
2y + 3 −b
2
(A.3)
for x > 0 and y > 0. The members S0
b of the extended Patton family are still strictly
consistent, since S0
b(x, y) agrees with Sb(x, y) up to terms that depend on y only, and
thus they are of the form (7) with the same choice of ϕb.
To extend S0
b(x, y) to x ≥0 and y ∈{0, 1, . . .} we proceed as discussed in Ap-
pendix A.1. If b > 1 we are in case I and extend by continuity. If 0 < b ≤1 we are in
case II and extend by setting S0
b(0, 0) = 0 and S0
b(0, y) = +∞for y ∈{1, 2, . . .}. If b ≤0
we are in case III, when there is no obvious extension. The expression in (A.3) yields
S0
b(x, y) = x −y log x for x > 0 and y ∈{0, 1, . . .} when b = 1, and S0
b(x, y) = 1
2(y −x)2
for x ≥0 and y ∈{0, 1, . . .} when b = 2, and thus the extended Patton family nests
both the Poisson scoring function and (1
2 times) the quadratic scoring function.
B
Further technical details and results for Section 2
In this appendix, we provide further technical details and supplementary results for
Section 2. Throughout, the scoring function S is the Poisson scoring function at (9).
Whenever feasible, we present formulas in the generic spatio-temporal setting of earth-
quake forecasts, where there are C grid cells and T regularly spaced test times, with
earthquake count yc,t in grid cell c ∈{1, . . . , C} at time t ∈{1, . . . , T}. In the specific
case of the OEF-Italy there are C = 8993 grid cells and T = 5514 test times.
B.1
Quantities in Figure 4 panels
We give technical details for the quantities displayed in the four panels of Figure 4. To
this end, suppose that model j issues forecasts in the form of expected cell counts x(j)
c,t .
As defined at (2), the spatially aggregated score of model j at time t is
¯S(j)
t
=
C
X
c=1
S

x(j)
c,t , yc,t

,
(B.1)
34

--- Sayfa 35 ---
which is the quantity plotted against time t in the first (top) panel in Figure 4, where
the index j stands for the LM, FCM, LG, SMA, and LRWA model, respectively. The
second panel in Figure 4 shows the daily score difference
d(j,k)
t
= ¯S(j)
t
−¯S(k)
t ,
(B.2)
where the index j stands for the FCM, LG, SMA, and LRWA model, and the index k
for the LM model.
Not surprisingly, plots of daily Poisson scores or daily Poisson score difference are
highly irregular. To obtain smoother curves, one can plot the cumulative score difference
D(j,k)
t
=
t
X
u=1
d(j,k)
u
(B.3)
against time t, as in Figure 2 of Taroni et al. (2018) and in the third panel of our Figure 4.
Alternatively, Figures 5, 6, and C2 of Herrmann and Marzocchi (2023) and the fourth
panel of our Figure 4 plot the normalized quantity
D(j,k)
t
/Nt,
(B.4)
where
Nt =
t
X
u=1
C
X
c=1
yc,u
(B.5)
is the cumulative count of target earthquakes over the test region and test times u ∈
{1, . . . , t}. We note that the quantities (B.1) to (B.4), which are displayed in the four
rows of Figure 4, are all negatively oriented, i.e., the smaller the better.
B.2
Total Poisson score, information gain, and information gain per
earthquake in spatio-temporal settings
Let us recall from (1) that the total score of model j is
¯S(j) = 1
T
T
X
t=1
¯S(j)
t ,
where ¯S(j)
t
is the spatially aggregated score for model j on day t from (B.1). The z
statistic (12) of the Diebold–Mariano test of equal predictive ability of model j and
model k is a multiple of the difference
¯S(j) −¯S(k),
(B.6)
where S is the Poisson score. We proceed to prove the claims in (15) that the information
gain IG(j,k) and the information gain per earthquake IGPE
(j,k) of model k over model j
also are multiples of the Poisson score difference at (B.6).
35

--- Sayfa 36 ---
We start with time t fixed and consider the definition of the information gain in the
purely spatial setting of Eq. (17) in Rhoades et al. (2011, p. 740). In this simpler setting,
the information gain of model k over model j at time t is
C
X
c=1
yc,t

log x(k)
c,t −log x(j)
c,t

−
C
X
c=1

x(k)
c,t −x(j)
c,t

.
(B.7)
To see the equivalence of our Eq. (B.7) and Eq. (17) in Rhoades et al. (2011), note the
specification of the quantity ik at the top of their page 731 and the fact that
C
X
c=1
yc,t

log x(k)
c,t −log x(j)
c,t

=
∞
X
z=1
z
C
X
c=1
1(yc,t = z)

log x(k)
c,t −log x(j)
c,t

represents the score differences in bins with observed target earthquakes. Summing the
expression for the information gain at time t in (B.7) over testing times t ∈{1, . . . , T},
the spatio-temporal information gain IG(j,k) of model k over model j is
IG(j,k) =
T
X
t=1
C
X
c=1
yc,t

log x(j)
c,t −log x(k)
c,t

−
T
X
t=1
C
X
c=1

x(j)
c,t −x(k)
c,t

.
(B.8)
Invoking Eqs. (9), (2), (1), and (B.6), we see that the information gain IG(j,k) is of the
form stated in Eq. (15).
The expression for the information gain per earthquake IGPE
(j,k) = IG(j,k)/NT in
Eq. (15) is now immediate. We note that in the case of OEF-Italy, due to the over-
lap of the seven-day forecast periods, the earthquake count NT equals seven times the
number of unique target earthquakes in the catalog.
B.3
Results for the CSEP T-test
As we have demonstrated in the previous section, the CSEP T-test of equal predictive
ability of two models (Rhoades et al., 2011, Section 2.3) is based on the information gain
per earthquake,
IGPE
(j,k) = T
NT

¯S(j) −¯S(k)
,
of model k over model j as defined at (15). Rhoades et al. (2011) posit that under the
null hypothesis of equal predictive ability the statistic
Θ(j,k) = N1/2
T
IGPE
(j,k)
s(j,k)
,
(B.9)
where
s2
(j,k) =
1
NT −1
T
X
t=1
C
X
c=1
yc,t

∆(j,k)
c,t
2
−
1
NT (NT −1)
 T
X
t=1
C
X
c=1
yc,t ∆(j,k)
c,t
!2
36

--- Sayfa 37 ---
MixA vs. MixB
MixA vs. LM
MixB vs. LM
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
Figure B.1: As Figure 5, but for the CSEP T-test.
and ∆(j,k)
c,t
= log x(j)
c,t −log x(k)
c,t , has a Student’s t-distribution with NT −1 degrees of
freedom.
While s(j,k) aims to quantify the variability of the daily score differences,
this line of reasoning suffers from the omission of terms associated to grid cells and
time periods without target earthquakes, a neglect of the effects of spatio-temporal
dependencies, and related issues in the estimation of sampling variability.17 As a result,
the test statistic (B.9) is not properly standardized, and in general the one-sided p value
generated by the T-test, namely,
p = 1 −Ψ
 Θ(j,k)

,
(B.10)
where Ψ denotes the CDF of the Student’s t-distribution with NT −1 degrees of freedom,
fails to be uniform between 0 and 1 when the null hypothesis is true.
We illustrate these issues in the simulation setting of Section 2.3. Figure B.1 is the
same as Figure 5 in Section 2.3, but now considering the CSEP T-test rather than the
Diebold–Mariano test. The left histogram in Figure B.1 shows the p values that arise
from 400 replicates of CSEP T-tests of MixA (index j) versus MixB (index k); we see
17Specifically, the information gain per earthquake in Eq. (17) of Rhoades et al. (2011) is normalized
by the observed count N of target earthquakes. Yet, it involves the quantities ˆ
NA and ˆ
NB, i.e., data
from all forecast bins regardless of occurred target earthquakes. Hence, the quantity N in the CSEP
T-statistic in the line that follows Eq. (18) of Rhoades et al. (2011) ought to be replaced by the (typically
much larger) number of all forecast bins, n, which is the proper sample size in this context (save for
further adjustments in case of dependencies, e.g., from overlapping forecast windows).
The sample variance in Eq. (18) of Rhoades et al. (2011) is only computed from N bins (with strictly
positive earthquake counts); instead, it ought to be computed from the Poisson score differences over
all n bins (regardless of occurred target earthquakes). Furthermore, the sample variance involves the
logarithmic terms in the Poisson score only, while ignoring the linear terms that sum to ˆ
NA and ˆ
NB,
respectively. Additional detail is available from the authors upon request.
One might argue that the CSEP T-test attempts to estimate the variance of the information gain
per earthquake (IGPE). However, IGPE normalizes by the observed count N of target earthquakes,
which may be zero. So, viewed as a random variable, IGPE may be undefined due to division by zero.
Fortunately, there is an easy way out of this conundrum, namely, to avoid division by the observed count
and consider the information gain (IG) and score differences in lieu of IGPE, which in view of Eq. (15)
amounts to evolving the CSEP T-test into the Diebold–Mariano test.
37

--- Sayfa 38 ---
Table B.1: As Table 2, but for the CSEP T-test of the null hypothesis of equal predictive
ability. We show the respective information gain per earthquake (IGPE
(j,k), diagonal) from
Table 3, the test statistic (Θ(j,k), Eq. (B.9), above diagonal), and the one-sided p value
(Eq. (B.10), below diagonal). Rows identify model j and columns model k in the test
statistic at (B.9).
LRWA
LM
SMA
FCM
LG
LRWA
−0.053
5.304
11.337
15.677
28.277
LM
0.000
0.000
4.380
11.382
23.965
SMA
0.000
0.000
0.061
10.641
30.186
FCM
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.253
18.942
LG
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.925
MixA vs. MixB
MixA vs. LM
MixB vs. LM
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
Figure B.2: As Figure B.1, but using forecasts on Mondays only.
that the histogram deviates considerably from the desired uniformity between 0 and 1.
Specifically, 85 of the 400 p values are smaller than 0.05, and 101 of them are larger than
0.95, so that the two-sided CSEP T-test rejects at a ratio of (85 + 101)/400 = 0.465,
grossly failing to attain the nominal level of 0.10 under the null hypothesis. We conclude
that the CSEP T-test rejects the null hypothesis of equal predictive ability more often
than warranted. This behavior is mirrored in Table B.1, where the T-test rejects the
null hypothesis of equal predictive ability for every pair of the five forecast models.
One might speculate that the undesirable behavior under the null hypothesis stems
predominantly from the overlap of the seven-day forecast periods in OEF-Italy.
In
this light, we repeat the analysis in Figure B.2 and Table B.2, but now considering
forecasts issued on Mondays only, to avoid overlap in the seven-day forecast periods.
Unfortunately, the aforementioned issues prevail. In the 400 tests of MixA versus MixB,
104 of the 400 p values are smaller than 0.05, and 108 of them are larger than 0.95,
rather than the nominal 20.
38

--- Sayfa 39 ---
CSEP T-test
MixA vs. MixB
CSEP T-test
MixA
S vs. MixB
S
DM Test
MixA vs. MixB
DM Test
MixA
S vs. MixB
S
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
0
0.25 0.5 0.75
1
0
0.25 0.5 0.75
1
0
0.25 0.5 0.75
1
0
0.25 0.5 0.75
1
Figure B.3: Histograms of p values for the CSEP T-test (Left) and the Diebold–Mariano
(DM) test (Right) of equal predictive ability in terms of the Poisson scoring function for
MixA versus MixB, and MixS
A versus MixS
B, respectively, based on 400 replicates. The
tests use forecasts for non-overlapping weekly periods issued Monday (Top) through
Sunday (Bottom). Compared to Figures 5, B.1, and B.2, note the zoomed in vertical
axis.
39

--- Sayfa 40 ---
Table B.2: As Table B.1, but using forecasts on Mondays only.
LRWA
LM
SMA
FCM
LG
LRWA
−0.068
1.929
6.117
6.097
10.618
LM
0.027
0.000
1.777
4.650
8.549
SMA
0.000
0.038
0.070
3.964
10.664
FCM
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.266
6.731
LG
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.910
For a more comprehensive analysis see Figure B.3, where the first and third columns
show histograms of p values for the CSEP T-test and the Diebold–Mariano test of
equal predictive ability for MixA versus MixB for non-overlapping weekly periods, issued
Monday through Sunday, respectively. While MixA versus MixB randomize between the
FCM model and the LG model at any given time t, another option is to randomize
between the two models at any grid cell c, with the assignment kept fixed over time.
We refer to the spatially randomized forecasts as MixS
A and MixS
B, respectively, and
show histograms of p values for the CSEP T-test and Diebold–Mariano test of equal
predictive ability for MixS
A versus MixS
B in the second and fourth column of Figure B.3.
The Diebold–Mariano test always yields uniform histograms for the p values, as desired.
The CSEP T-test instead yields U-shaped histograms, resulting from an underestimated
variance of score differences, which entails test statistics that are larger (in absolute
value) than warranted and, consequently, rejections of the null hypothesis well beyond
the nominal level.
C
Forecast performance at the grid cell level
While Sections 2.2 and 2.3 considered overall and temporal assessments of a model’s
predictive performance, respectively, we might also ask in which areas of the testing
region one can find remarkable differences in forecast performance. To do so, we can
study the performance via temporally aggregated scores for each of the 8993 grid cells
in OEF-Italy. Specifically, we consider the average score difference between model j and
model k in grid cell c, given by
∆(j,k)
c
= 1
T
T
X
t=1

S(x(j)
c,t , yc,t) −S(x(k)
c,t , yc,t)

,
(C.1)
where S is the Poisson scoring function. We here use the average instead of the total score
to normalize to daily performance. We again let k stand for the LM model. Positive
values of ∆(j,k)
c
indicate that the LM model produces superior forecasts in grid cell c.
40

--- Sayfa 41 ---
SMA − LM
LRWA − LM
FCM − LM
LG − LM
 6°E
10°E
14°E
18°E
 6°E
10°E
14°E
18°E
36°N
40°N
44°N
36°N
40°N
44°N
−10−4 0
10−4
10−2
Score
difference
Obs.
earthquakes
Figure C.1: Average score difference (C.1) under the Poisson scoring function between
the LM (index k) and the other four models (index j, shown panels).
Framed cells
represent bins with at least one target earthquake.
Positive differences (blue color)
indicate that the LM model has superior forecast performance; negative differences (red
color) indicate inferior performance.
41

--- Sayfa 42 ---
Figure C.1 plots ∆(j,k)
c
, i.e., the average score difference between the LM model and
model j in grid cell c, for the four competitor models. In line with our previous analysis,
the LM model exhibits superior forecast performance compared to FCM, SMA, and LM
in most grid cells with observed M4+ target earthquakes, especially in central Italy.
While the FCM model receives lower scores than the LM model in regions with less
seismicity, the LG model performs worse than the LM model in those. Compared to
LRWA, the sign of the score differences is more mixed. We emphasize that these results
are to be interpreted diagnostically, with formal statistical inference being challenging in
spatial settings due to massive dependencies and issues of multiple testing (Zhang et al.,
2015; Wilks, 2016).
D
Generation of consistency bands for mean-reliability di-
agrams
To accommodate for the non-negative integer character of earthquake counts we use
a resampling procedure based on Algorithm 3 in Gneiting and Resin (2023) for the
generation of the consistency bands in Figure 7. The algorithm requires fully specified
predictive distributions from which it then samples. In the setting at hand we have
mean-forecasts (more specifically, expected counts) at our disposal only. To derive a
fully specified predictive distribution from the mean-forecast at hand, we adapt the
unconditional distribution of the number of observed target earthquakes. Specifically, if
the vector (p0, p1, . . . , pm) ∈[0, 1]m+1 comprises the empirical frequencies of observing
0, 1, . . . , m earthquakes in the record at hand, we derive the predictive distribution Fx
associated with the mean-forecast x as the discrete probability measure on 0, 1, . . . , m
with masses (p0 + εx, p1, . . . , pm)/(1 + εx), where εx is such that
x =
1
1 + εx
m
X
j=1
j pj,
(D.1)
which ensures that the distribution Fx has mean x.
Then we apply Algorithm 3 in
Gneiting and Resin (2023) to the respective collection of pairs (Fx, x).
42
